јлиса в —тране чудес / Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
Ћьюис  эрролл

ј. јлександров


Ѕестселлер на все времена
„тение оригинальных произведений Ц простой и действенный способ погрузитьс€ в €зыковую среду и совершенствоватьс€ в иностранном €зыке. —ери€ ЂЅестселлер на все временаї Ц это возможность улучшить свой английский, чита€ лучшие произведени€ англо€зычных авторов, любимые миллионами читателей. ƒл€ лучшего понимани€ текста в книгу включены краткий словарь и комментарии, по€сн€ющие €зыковые и лингвострановедческие вопросы, исторические и культурные реалии описываемой эпохи.

¬ эту книгу дл€ чтени€ включены две истории Ц Ђјлиса в —тране чудесї и Ђјлиса в «азеркальеї. «ахватывающие рассказы о неверо€тных приключени€х јлисы полны каламбуров и шуток, основанных на игре слов, а потому читать их в оригинале особенно при€тно и полезно дл€ совершенствовани€ английского.

 нига предназначена дл€ тех, кто изучает английский €зык на продолжающем или продвинутом уровне и стремитс€ к его совершенствованию.





 эрролл, Ћьюис = Lewis Carroll

јлиса в —тране чудес = Alice's Adventures in Wonderland





©†ќќќ Ђ»здательство ЂЁксмої, 2016





AliceТs Adventures in Wonderland



		All in the golden afternoon
		Full leisurely we glide;[1 - ѕо легенде, „арльз Ћютвидж ƒоджсон (более известный под псевдонимом Ћьюис  эрролл) сочинил историю о приключени€х јлисы в —тране чудес во врем€ катани€ на лодке с преподобным –обинсоном ƒакуортом и трем€ сестрами Ћидделл Ц Ћориной, јлисой и Ёдит. ¬последствии истори€ была немного изменена и опубликована.]
		For both our oars, with little skill,
		By little arms are plied,
		While little hands make vain pretence
		Our wanderings to guide.

		Ah, cruel Three! In such an hour
		Beneath such dreamy weather,
		To beg a tale of breath too weak
		To stir the tiniest feather!
		Yet what can one poor voice avail
		Against three tongues together?

		Imperious Prima flashes forth
		Her edict Сto begin itТ:
		In gentler tones Secunda hopes
		СThere will be nonsense in it!Т
		While Tertia interrupts the tale
		Not more than once a minute.

		Anon, to sudden silence won,
		In fancy they pursue
		The dreamchild moving through a land
		Of wonders wild and new,
		In friendly chat with bird or beast Ч
		And half believe it true.

		And ever, as the story drained
		The wells of fancy dry,
		And faintly strove that weary one
		To put the subject by,
		СThe rest next time Ц Т СIt is next time!Т
		The happy voices cry.

		Thus grew the tale of Wonderland:
		Thus slowly, one by one,
		Its quaint events were hammered out Ч
		And now the tale is done,
		And home we steer, a merry crew,
		Beneath the setting sun.

		Alice! A childish story take,
		And with a gentle hand,
		Lay it where ChildhoodТs dreams are twined
		In MemoryТs mystic band,
		Like pilgrimТs witherТd wreath of flowers
		Plucked in a far off land.




Chapter I

Down the Rabbit-Hole


Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, Сand what is the use of a book,Т thought Alice Сwithout pictures or conversation?Т

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisychain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, СOh dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!Т (when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOATPOCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoatpocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbithole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbithole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and bookshelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled СORANGE MARMALADEТ[2 - ORANGE MARMALADE Ц мармелад Ц это варенье, приготовленное из цитрусовых (обычно из апельсинов).], but to her great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

СWell!Т thought Alice to herself, Сafter such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave theyТll all think me at home! Why, I wouldnТt say anything about it, even if I fell off the top of the house!Т (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! СI wonder how many miles[3 - Miles Ц мили, британские единицы измерени€ рассто€ни€. 1 мил€ = 1609 км.] IТve fallen by this time?Т she said aloud. СI must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, I thinkЦТ (for, you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom[4 - Schoolroom Ц в ¬икторианскую эпоху дети получали основы образовани€ дома, занима€сь в классной комнате с гувернантками или гувернерами. «атем мальчики отправл€лись в школыпансионы, а девочки часто продолжали обучение дома.], and though this was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) СЦyes, thatТs about the right distance Ц but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude IТve got to?Т (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. СI wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH the earth! How funny itТll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I thinkЦТ (she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this time, as it didnТt sound at all the right word) СЦbut I shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. Please, MaТam, is this New Zealand or Australia?Т (and she tried to curtsey as she spoke Ц fancy CURTSEYING as youТre falling through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) СAnd what an ignorant little girl sheТll think me for asking! No, itТll never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.Т

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again. СDinahТll miss me very much tonight, I should think!Т (Dinah was the cat.) СI hope theyТll remember her saucer of milk at teatime. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no mice in the air, IТm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and thatТs very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?Т And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, СDo cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?Т and sometimes, СDo bats eat cats?Т for, you see, as she couldnТt answer either question, it didnТt much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, СNow, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?Т when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, СOh my ears and whiskers, how late itТs getting!Т She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little threelegged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and AliceТs first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches[5 - Inch Ц дюйм, единица измерени€ длины. 1 дюйм Ц 2,54 см.] high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rathole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head though the doorway; Сand even if my head would go through,Т thought poor Alice, Сit would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only know how to begin.Т For, you see, so many outoftheway things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, (Сwhich certainly was not here before,Т said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words СDRINK MEТ beautifully printed on it in large letters.

It was all very well to say СDrink me,Т but the wise little Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry. СNo, IТll look first,Т she said, Сand see whether itТs marked УpoisonФ or notТ; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a redhot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked Сpoison,Т it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked Сpoison,Т so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherrytart, custard, pineapple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.


* * *

СWhat a curious feeling!Т said Alice; СI must be shutting up like a telescope.Т

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; Сfor it might end, you know,Т said Alice to herself, Сin my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?Т And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.

СCome, thereТs no use in crying like that!Т said Alice to herself, rather sharply; СI advise you to leave off this minute!Т She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people. СBut itТs no use now,Т thought poor Alice, Сto pretend to be two people! Why, thereТs hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!Т

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words СEAT MEТ were beautifully marked in currants[6 - —urrants Ц сушеный виноград сорта Ђкоринкаї Ц мелкий, сладкий и без косточек. ≈го часто кладут в выпечку.]. СWell, IТll eat it,Т said Alice, Сand if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way IТll get into the garden, and I donТt care which happens!Т

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, СWhich way? Which way?Т, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but outoftheway things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.




Chapter II

The Pool of Tears


СCuriouser[7 - —uriouser Ц эта форма некорректна: так как слово curious состоит из более чем двух слогов, правильна€ сравнительна€ степень будет more curious. ¬озможно, использование такой формы Ц это кака€то шутка, известна€ в семействе Ћидделл. ј может быть, это Ђдетское словечкої Ц просто распространенна€ ошибка, которую делают дети.] and curiouser!Т cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); Сnow IТm opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Goodbye, feet!Т (for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off). СOh, my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? IТm sure I shanТt be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best way you can; Ц but I must be kind to them,Т thought Alice, Сor perhaps they wonТt walk the way I want to go! Let me see: IТll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.Т

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. СThey must go by the carrier,Т she thought; Сand how funny itТll seem, sending presents to oneТs own feet! And how odd the directions will look!



ALICEТS RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.

$$$$$HEARTHRUG,

$$$$$$$$$$NEAR THE FENDER,

$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$(WITH ALICEТS LOVE).


Oh dear, what nonsense IТm talking!Т

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now more than nine feet[8 - Feet Ц мн.ч. от foot. 1 фут = 30 см.] high, and she at once took up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

СYou ought to be ashamed of yourself,Т said Alice, Сa great girl like you,Т (she might well say this), Сto go on crying in this way! Stop this moment, I tell you!Т But she went on all the same, shedding gallons[9 - Gallon = 4,55 литра.] of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, СOh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh! wonТt she be savage if IТve kept her waiting!Т Alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, СIf you please, sirЦТ The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: СDear, dear! How queer everything is today! And yesterday things went on just as usual. I wonder if IТve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a little different. But if IТm not the same, the next question is, Who in the world am I? Ah, THATТS the great puzzle!Т And she began thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.

СIТm sure IТm not Ada,Т she said, Сfor her hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesnТt go in ringlets at all; and IТm sure I canТt be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a very little! Besides, SHEТS she, and IТm I, and Ц oh dear, how puzzling it all is! IТll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is Ц oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate![10 - Ёто математическа€ шутка: специалисты утверждают, что, продолжа€ последовательность, до двадцати јлиса действительно не доберетс€.] However, the Multiplication Table doesnТt signify: letТs try Geography. London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and RomeЦno, THATТS all wrong, IТm certain! I must have been changed for Mabel! IТll try and say УHow doth the littleЦФ[11 - УHow doth the littleЦФ Ц это начало нравоучительного стихотворени€ дл€ детей »саака ”оттса (1674Ц1748), которое называетс€ Ђѕротив праздности и озорстваї.]Т and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do: Ц

		СHow doth the little crocodile
		Improve his shining tail,
		And pour the waters of the Nile
		On every golden scale!

		СHow cheerfully he seems to grin,
		How neatly spread his claws,
		And welcome little fishes in
		With gently smiling jaws!Т

СIТm sure those are not the right words,Т said poor Alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, СI must be Mabel after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, IТve made up my mind about it; if IТm Mabel, IТll stay down here! ItТll be no use their putting their heads down and saying УCome up again, dear!Ф I shall only look up and say УWho am I then? Tell me that first, and then, if I like being that person, IТll come up: if not, IТll stay down here till IТm somebody elseФ Ц but, oh dear!Т cried Alice, with a sudden burst of tears, СI do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tired of being all alone here!Т

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see that she had put on one of the RabbitТs little white kid gloves while she was talking. СHow CAN I have done that?Т she thought. СI must be growing small again.Т She got up and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

СThat WAS a narrow escape!Т said Alice, a good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; Сand now for the garden!Т and she ran with all speed back to the little door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as before, Сand things are worse than ever,Т thought the poor child, Сfor I never was so small as this before, never! And I declare itТs too bad, that it is!Т

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, Сand in that case I can go back by railway,Т she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines[12 - Bathing machines Ц купальные машины: четырехколесные повозки, зат€нутые холстом. ѕереодеватьс€ в купальный костюм нужно было внутри, после чего лошади ввозили повозку в воду и разворачивали ее так, чтобы купальщика не было видно с берега. ѕосле этого можно было спуститьс€ в воду.] in the sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.

СI wish I hadnТt cried so much!Т said Alice, as she swam about, trying to find her way out. СI shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by being drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure! However, everything is queer today.Т

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

СWould it be of any use, now,Т thought Alice, Сto speak to this mouse? Everything is so outoftheway down here, that I should think very likely it can talk: at any rate, thereТs no harm in trying.Т So she began: СO Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse!Т (Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having seen in her brotherТs Latin Grammar, СA mouse Ц of a mouse Ц to a mouse Ц a mouse Ц O mouse![13 - A mouse Ц of a mouse Ц to a mouse Ц a mouse Ц O mouse! Ц Ёто именительный, родительный, дательный, винительный и звательный падежи соответственно.]Т The Mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.

СPerhaps it doesnТt understand English,Т thought Alice; СI daresay itТs a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror[14 - William the Conqueror Ц ¬ильгельм «авоеватель, первый норманнский король јнглии (1066Ц1078). ≈го победа в битве при √астингсе (1066) привела его к власти и дала начало нормандскому завоеванию јнглии.].Т (For, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.) So she began again: СO&#249; est ma chatte?[15 - O&#249; est ma chatte? Ц √де мо€ кошка? (фр.)]Т which was the first sentence in her French lessonbook. The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright. СOh, I beg your pardon!Т cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animalТs feelings. СI quite forgot you didnТt like cats.Т

СNot like cats!Т cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. СWould YOU like cats if you were me?Т

СWell, perhaps not,Т said Alice in a soothing tone: СdonТt be angry about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think youТd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing,Т Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, Сand she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face Ц and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse Ц and sheТs such a capital one for catching mice Ц oh, I beg your pardon!Т cried Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. СWe wonТt talk about her any more if youТd rather not.Т

СWe indeed!Т cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail. СAs if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATED cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! DonТt let me hear the name again!Т

СI wonТt indeed!Т said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of conversation. СAre youЦare you fondЦofЦof dogs?Т The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly: СThere is such a nice little dog near our house I should like to show you! A little brighteyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And itТll fetch things when you throw them, and itТll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things Ц I canТt remember half of themЦand it belongs to a farmer, you know, and he says itТs so useful, itТs worth a hundred pounds! He says it kills all the rats andЦoh dear!Т cried Alice in a sorrowful tone, СIТm afraid IТve offended it again!Т For the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, СMouse dear! Do come back again, and we wonТt talk about cats or dogs either, if you donТt like them!Т When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, СLet us get to the shore, and then IТll tell you my history, and youТll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.Т

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet,[16 - A Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet Ц список существ напоминает об участниках той лодочной прогулки, во врем€ которой была впервые рассказана истори€ об јлисе. Duck Ц это –обинсон ƒакуорт, Dodo Ц сам „арльз Ћютвидж ƒоджсон (который слегка заикалс€, в том числе произнос€ свое им€), а также сестры јлисы: Lory Ц Ћорина, и Eaglet Ц Ёдит.] and several other curious creatures. Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




Chapter III

A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale


They were indeed a queerlooking party that assembled on the bank Ц the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, СI am older than you, and must know betterТ; and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them, called out, СSit down, all of you, and listen to me! IТLL soon make you dry enough!Т They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

СAhem!Т said the Mouse with an important air, Сare you all ready? This is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! УWilliam the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope,[17 - William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope Ц это цитата из Ђ раткого курса историиї (автор Ц ’эвиленд де ћезюрье „епмелл). ¬еро€тно, по этой книге занимались девочки Ћидделл.] was soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and NorthumbriaЦФТ

СUgh!Т said the Lory, with a shiver.

СI beg your pardon!Т said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: СDid you speak?Т

СNot I!Т said the Lory hastily.

I thought you did,Т said the Mouse. СЦI proceed. УEdwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisableЦФТ

СFound WHAT?Т said the Duck.

СFound IT,Т the Mouse replied rather crossly: Сof course you know what УitФ means.Т

СI know what УitФ means well enough, when I find a thing,Т said the Duck: СitТs generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the archbishop find?Т

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, СУЦfound it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the crown. WilliamТs conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his NormansЦФ How are you getting on now, my dear?Т it continued, turning to Alice as it spoke.

СAs wet as ever,Т said Alice in a melancholy tone: Сit doesnТt seem to dry me at all.Т

СIn that case,Т said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, СI move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic remediesЦТ

СSpeak English!Т said the Eaglet. СI donТt know the meaning of half those long words, and, whatТs more, I donТt believe you do either!Т And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds tittered audibly.

СWhat I was going to say,Т said the Dodo in an offended tone, Сwas, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucusrace[18 - Caucusrace Ц caucus означает группу ответственных лиц Ц членов политической партии или собрани€ дл€ обсуждени€ и утверждени€ планов. ƒальнейшее описание отражает отношение автора к подобным видам де€тельности.].Т

СWhat IS a Caucusrace?Т said Alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

СWhy,Т said the Dodo, Сthe best way to explain it is to do it.Т (And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a racecourse, in a sort of circle, (Сthe exact shape doesnТt matter,Т it said,) and then all the party were placed along the course, here and there. There was no СOne, two, three, and away,Т but they began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However, when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called out СThe race is over!Т and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, СBut who has won?Т

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said, СEVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.Т

СBut who is to give the prizes?Т quite a chorus of voices asked.

СWhy, SHE, of course,Т said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused way, СPrizes! Prizes!Т

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits[19 - Comfits Ц засахаренные орехи и сухофрукты.], (luckily the salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly one apiece all round.

СBut she must have a prize herself, you know,Т said the Mouse.

СOf course,Т the Dodo replied very gravely. СWhat else have you got in your pocket?Т he went on, turning to Alice.

СOnly a thimble,Т said Alice sadly.

СHand it over here,Т said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying СWe beg your acceptance of this elegant thimbleТ; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back. However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

СYou promised to tell me your history, you know,Т said Alice, Сand why it is you hate Ц C and D,Т she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.

СMine is a long and a sad tale!Т said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and sighing.

СIt IS a long tail, certainly,Т said Alice, looking down with wonder at the MouseТs tail; Сbut why do you call it sad?Т And she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this: Ц

		$$$$$$$$$$$$СFury said to a
		$$$$$$$$$mouse, That he
		$$$$$$met in the
		$$$house,
		УLet us
		$$$both go to
		$$$$$$law: I will
		$$$$$$$$$prosecute
		$$$$$$$$$$$$YOU. Ц Come,
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$IТll take no
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$denial; We
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$must have a
		$$$$$$$$$$$$trial: For
		$$$$$$$$$really this
		$$$$$$morning IТve
		$$$nothing
		to do.Ф
		$$$Said the
		$$$$$$mouse to the
		$$$$$$$$$cur, УSuch
		$$$$$$$$$$$$a trial,
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$dear Sir,
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$With
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$no jury
		$$$$$$$$$$$$or judge,
		$$$$$$$$$would be
		$$$$$$wasting
		$$$our
		$$$$$$breath.Ф
		$$$$$$$$$УIТll be
		$$$$$$$$$$$$judge, IТll
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$be jury,Ф
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$Said
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$cunning
		$$$$$$$$$$$$old Fury:
		$$$$$$$$$УIТll
		$$$$$$try the
		$$$$$$$$$whole
		$$$$$$$$$$$$cause,
		$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$and
		$$$$$$$$$$$$condemn
		$$$$$$$$$you
		$$$$$$to
		$$$$$$$$$death.ФТ

СYou are not attending!Т said the Mouse to Alice severely. СWhat are you thinking of?Т

СI beg your pardon,Т said Alice very humbly: Сyou had got to the fifth bend, I think?Т

СI had NOT!Т cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

СA knot!Т said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking anxiously about her. СOh, do let me help to undo it!Т

СI shall do nothing of the sort,Т said the Mouse, getting up and walking away. СYou insult me by talking such nonsense!Т

СI didnТt mean it!Т pleaded poor Alice. СBut youТre so easily offended, you know!Т

The Mouse only growled in reply.

СPlease come back and finish your story!Т Alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, СYes, please do!Т but the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

СWhat a pity it wouldnТt stay!Т sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter СAh, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose YOUR temper!Т СHold your tongue, Ma!Т said the young Crab, a little snappishly. СYouТre enough to try the patience of an oyster!Т

СI wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!Т said Alice aloud, addressing nobody in particular. СSheТd soon fetch it back!Т

СAnd who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?Т said the Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: СDinahТs our cat. And sheТs such a capital one for catching mice you canТt think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why, sheТll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!Т

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, СI really must be getting home; the nightair doesnТt suit my throat!Т and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, СCome away, my dears! ItТs high time you were all in bed!Т On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

СI wish I hadnТt mentioned Dinah!Т she said to herself in a melancholy tone. СNobody seems to like her, down here, and IТm sure sheТs the best cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!Т And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and lowspirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his story.




Chapter IV

The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill


It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to itself СThe Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh my fur and whiskers! SheТll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets! Where CAN I have dropped them, I wonder?Т Alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she very goodnaturedly began hunting about for them, but they were nowhere to be seenЦeverything seemed to have changed since her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door, had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and called out to her in an angry tone, СWhy, Mary Ann, what ARE you doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan! Quick, now!Т And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it had made.

СHe took me for his housemaid,Т she said to herself as she ran. СHow surprised heТll be when he finds out who I am! But IТd better take him his fan and glovesЦthat is, if I can find them.Т As she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate with the name СW. RABBITТ engraved upon it. She went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and gloves.

СHow queer it seems,Т Alice said to herself, Сto be going messages for a rabbit! I suppose DinahТll be sending me on messages next!Т And she began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: СУMiss Alice! Come here directly, and get ready for your walk!Ф УComing in a minute, nurse! But IТve got to see that the mouse doesnТt get out.Ф Only I donТt think,Т Alice went on, Сthat theyТd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people about like that!Т

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the lookingglass. There was no label this time with the words СDRINK ME,Т but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips. СI know SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,Т she said to herself, Сwhenever I eat or drink anything; so IТll just see what this bottle does. I do hope itТll make me grow large again, for really IТm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!Т

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself СThatТs quite enough Ц I hope I shanТt grow any more Ц As it is, I canТt get out at the door Ц I do wish I hadnТt drunk quite so much!Т

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head. Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself СNow I can do no more, whatever happens. What WILL become of me?Т

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

СIt was much pleasanter at home,Т thought poor Alice, Сwhen one wasnТt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and rabbits. I almost wish I hadnТt gone down that rabbithole Ц and yet Ц and yet Ц itТs rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what CAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairytales, I fancied that kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one! There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And when I grow up, IТll write one Ц but IТm grown up now,Т she added in a sorrowful tone; Сat least thereТs no room to grow up any more HERE.Т

СBut then,Т thought Alice, Сshall I NEVER get any older than I am now? ThatТll be a comfort, one way Ц never to be an old woman Ц but then Ц always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldnТt like THAT!Т

СOh, you foolish Alice!Т she answered herself. СHow can you learn lessons in here? Why, thereТs hardly room for YOU, and no room at all for any lessonbooks!Т

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

СMary Ann! Mary Ann!Т said the voice. СFetch me my gloves this moment!Т Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as the door opened inwards, and AliceТs elbow was pressed hard against it, that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself СThen IТll go round and get in at the window.Т

СTHAT you wonТtТ thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a cucumberframe, or something of the sort.

Next came an angry voice Ц the RabbitТs Ц СPat! Pat! Where are you?Т And then a voice she had never heard before, СSure then IТm here! Digging for apples,[20 - Digging for apples Ц Pat Ц сокращение от Patrick, а ѕатрик считаетс€ самым распространенным ирландским именем. Ђ»рландские €блокиї Ц неофициальное название картошки.] yer honour!Т

СDigging for apples, indeed!Т said the Rabbit angrily. СHere! Come and help me out of THIS!Т (Sounds of more broken glass.)

СNow tell me, Pat, whatТs that in the window?Т

СSure, itТs an arm, yer honour!Т (He pronounced it Сarrum.Т)

СAn arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole window!Т

СSure, it does, yer honour: but itТs an arm for all that.Т

СWell, itТs got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!Т

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers now and then; such as, СSure, I donТt like it, yer honour, at all, at all!Т СDo as I tell you, you coward!Т and at last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were TWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. СWhat a number of cucumberframes there must be!Т thought Alice. СI wonder what theyТll do next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD! IТm sure I donТt want to stay in here any longer!Т

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all talking together: she made out the words: СWhereТs the other ladder? Ц Why, I hadnТt to bring but one; BillТs got the other Ц Bill! fetch it here, lad! Ц Here, put Сem up at this corner Ц No, tie Сem together first Ц they donТt reach half high enough yet Ц Oh! theyТll do well enough; donТt be particular Ц Here, Bill! catch hold of this ropeЦWill the roof bear? Ц Mind that loose slate Ц Oh, itТs coming down! Heads below!Т (a loud crash) Ц СNow, who did that?ЦIt was Bill, I fancy Ц WhoТs to go down the chimney? Ц Nay, I shanТt! YOU do it! Ц That I wonТt, then! Ц BillТs to go down Ц Here, Bill! the master says youТre to go down the chimney!Т

СOh! So BillТs got to come down the chimney, has he?Т said Alice to herself. СShy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldnТt be in BillТs place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but I THINK I can kick a little!Т

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till she heard a little animal (she couldnТt guess of what sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to herself СThis is Bill,Т she gave one sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of СThere goes Bill!Т then the RabbitТs voice along Ц СCatch him, you by the hedge!Т then silence, and then another confusion of voices Ц СHold up his head Ц Brandy now ЦDonТt choke him Ц How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell us all about it!Т

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (СThatТs Bill,Т thought Alice,) СWell, I hardly know Ц No more, thank ye; IТm better now Ц but IТm a deal too flustered to tell you Ц all I know is, something comes at me like a Jackinthebox, and up I goes like a skyrocket!Т

СSo you did, old fellow!Т said the others.

СWe must burn the house down!Т said the RabbitТs voice; and Alice called out as loud as she could, СIf you do. IТll set Dinah at you!Т

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, СI wonder what they WILL do next! If they had any sense, theyТd take the roof off.Т After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, СA barrowful will do, to begin with.Т

СA barrowful of WHAT?Т thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face. СIТll put a stop to this,Т she said to herself, and shouted out, СYouТd better not do that again!Т which produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head. СIf I eat one of these cakes,Т she thought, СitТs sure to make SOME change in my size; and as it canТt possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, I suppose.Т

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in the middle, being held up by two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood.

СThe first thing IТve got to do,Т said Alice to herself, as she wandered about in the wood, Сis to grow to my right size again; and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be the best plan.Т

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. СPoor little thing!Т said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very like having a game of play with a carthorse, and expecting every moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and till the puppyТs bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

СAnd yet what a dear little puppy it was!Т said Alice, as she leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the leaves: СI should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if Ц if IТd only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! IТd nearly forgotten that IТve got to grow up again! Let me see Ц how IS it to be managed? I suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great question is, what?Т

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances. There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.




Chapter V

Advice from a Caterpillar


The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

СWho are YOU?Т said the Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied, rather shyly, СI Ц I hardly know, sir, just at present Ц at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been changed several times since then.Т

СWhat do you mean by that?Т said the Caterpillar sternly. СExplain yourself!Т

СI canТt explain MYSELF, IТm afraid, sirТ said Alice, Сbecause IТm not myself, you see.Т

СI donТt see,Т said the Caterpillar.

СIТm afraid I canТt put it more clearly,Т Alice replied very politely, Сfor I canТt understand it myself to begin with; and being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.Т

СIt isnТt,Т said the Caterpillar.

СWell, perhaps you havenТt found it so yet,Т said Alice; Сbut when you have to turn into a chrysalis Ц you will some day, you know Ц and then after that into a butterfly, I should think youТll feel it a little queer, wonТt you?Т

СNot a bit,Т said the Caterpillar.

СWell, perhaps your feelings may be different,Т said Alice; Сall I know is, it would feel very queer to ME.Т

СYou!Т said the Caterpillar contemptuously. СWho are YOU?Т

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation. Alice felt a little irritated at the CaterpillarТs making such VERY short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, СI think, you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.Т

СWhy?Т said the Caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a VERY unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

СCome back!Т the Caterpillar called after her. СIТve something important to say!Т

This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.

СKeep your temper,Т said the Caterpillar.

СIs that all?Т said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she could.

СNo,Т said the Caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, СSo you think youТre changed, do you?Т

СIТm afraid I am, sir,Т said Alice; СI canТt remember things as I used Ц and I donТt keep the same size for ten minutes together!Т

СCanТt remember WHAT things?Т said the Caterpillar.

СWell, IТve tried to say СHOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE,Т but it all came different!Т Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

СRepeat УYOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,Ф[21 - УYouТre old, Father WilliamФ Ц это перва€ строчка попул€рного детского стихотворени€ –оберта —аути (1744Ц1832), Ђ”тешени€ старика и как он их получилї.]Т said the Caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began: Ц

		СYou are old, Father William,Т the young man said,
		СAnd your hair has become very white;
		And yet you incessantly stand on your head Ц
		Do you think, at your age, it is right?Т

		СIn my youth,Т Father William replied to his son,
		СI feared it might injure the brain;
		But, now that IТm perfectly sure I have none,
		Why, I do it again and again.Т

		СYou are old,Т said the youth, Сas I mentioned before,
		And have grown most uncommonly fat;
		Yet you turned a backsomersault in at the door Ц
		Pray, what is the reason of that?Т

		СIn my youth,Т said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
		СI kept all my limbs very supple
		By the use of this ointment Ц one shilling the box Ц
		Allow me to sell you a couple?Т

		СYou are old,Т said the youth, Сand your jaws are too weak
		For anything tougher than suet;
		Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak Ц
		Pray how did you manage to do it?Т

		СIn my youth,Т said his father, СI took to the law,
		And argued each case with my wife;
		And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
		Has lasted the rest of my life.Т

		СYou are old,Т said the youth, Сone would hardly suppose
		That your eye was as steady as ever;
		Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose Ц
		What made you so awfully clever?Т

		СI have answered three questions, and that is enough,Т
		Said his father; СdonТt give yourself airs!
		Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
		Be off, or IТll kick you down stairs!Т

СThat is not said right,Т said the Caterpillar.

СNot QUITE right, IТm afraid,Т said Alice, timidly; Сsome of the words have got altered.Т

СIt is wrong from beginning to end,Т said the Caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

СWhat size do you want to be?Т it asked.

СOh, IТm not particular as to size,Т Alice hastily replied; Сonly one doesnТt like changing so often, you know.Т

СI DONТT know,Т said the Caterpillar.

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

СAre you content now?Т said the Caterpillar.

СWell, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you wouldnТt mind,Т said Alice: Сthree inches is such a wretched height to be.Т

СIt is a very good height indeed!Т said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

СBut IТm not used to it!Т pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And she thought of herself, СI wish the creatures wouldnТt be so easily offended!Т

СYouТll get used to it in time,Т said the Caterpillar; and it put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went, СOne side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow shorter.Т

СOne side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT?Т thought Alice to herself.

СOf the mushroom,Т said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.

СAnd now which is which?Т she said to herself, and nibbled a little of the righthand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.


* * *

СCome, my headТs free at last!Т said Alice in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

СWhat CAN all that green stuff be?Т said Alice. СAnd where HAVE my shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I canТt see you?Т She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating her violently with its wings.

СSerpent!Т screamed the Pigeon.

СIТm NOT a serpent!Т said Alice indignantly. СLet me alone!Т

СSerpent, I say again!Т repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, СIТve tried every way, and nothing seems to suit them!Т

СI havenТt the least idea what youТre talking about,Т said Alice.

СIТve tried the roots of trees, and IТve tried banks, and IТve tried hedges,Т the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; Сbut those serpents! ThereТs no pleasing them!Т

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

СAs if it wasnТt trouble enough hatching the eggs,Т said the Pigeon; Сbut I must be on the lookout for serpents night and day! Why, I havenТt had a wink of sleep these three weeks!Т

СIТm very sorry youТve been annoyed,Т said Alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.

СAnd just as IТd taken the highest tree in the wood,Т continued the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, Сand just as I was thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from the sky! Ugh, Serpent!Т

СBut IТm NOT a serpent, I tell you!Т said Alice. СIТm a Ц IТm aЦТ

СWell! WHAT are you?Т said the Pigeon. СI can see youТre trying to invent something!Т

СI Ц IТm a little girl,Т said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.

СA likely story indeed!Т said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest contempt. СIТve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONE with such a neck as that! No, no! YouТre a serpent; and thereТs no use denying it. I suppose youТll be telling me next that you never tasted an egg!Т

СI HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,Т said Alice, who was a very truthful child; Сbut little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you know.Т

СI donТt believe it,Т said the Pigeon; Сbut if they do, why then theyТre a kind of serpent, thatТs all I can say.Т

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, СYouТre looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it matter to me whether youТre a little girl or a serpent?Т

СIt matters a good deal to ME,Т said Alice hastily; Сbut IТm not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldnТt want YOURS: I donТt like them raw.Т

СWell, be off, then!Т said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual. СCome, thereТs half my plan done now! How puzzling all these changes are! IТm never sure what IТm going to be, from one minute to another! However, IТve got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden Ц how IS that to be done, I wonder?Т As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high. СWhoever lives there,Т thought Alice, СitТll never do to come upon them THIS size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!Т So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.




Chapter VI

Pig and Pepper


For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the wood Ц (she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a fish) Ц and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The FishFootman began by producing from under his arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, СFor the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen to play croquet[22 - Croquet Ц крокет, игра, в которую играют м€чами и молотками с длинными руко€тками. ћ€чи нужно направл€ть сквозь воротца/обручи/калитки.  рокет был попул€рен во второй половине XIX в., особенно в ¬икторианскую эпоху.].Т The FrogFootman repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the words a little, СFrom the Queen. An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.Т

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the FishFootman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

ThereТs no sort of use in knocking,Т said the Footman, Сand that for two reasons. First, because IТm on the same side of the door as you are; secondly, because theyТre making such a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.Т And certainly there was a most extraordinary noise going on within Ц a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

СPlease, then,Т said Alice, Сhow am I to get in?Т

СThere might be some sense in your knocking,Т the Footman went on without attending to her, Сif we had the door between us. For instance, if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.Т He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. СBut perhaps he canТt help it,Т she said to herself; Сhis eyes are so VERY nearly at the top of his head. But at any rate he might answer questions. Ц How am I to get in?Т she repeated, aloud.

СI shall sit here,Т the Footman remarked, Сtill tomorrowЦТ

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came skimming out, straight at the FootmanТs head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

СЦor next day, maybe,Т the Footman continued in the same tone, exactly as if nothing had happened.

СHow am I to get in?Т asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

СARE you to get in at all?Т said the Footman. СThatТs the first question, you know.Т

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. СItТs really dreadful,Т she muttered to herself, Сthe way all the creatures argue. ItТs enough to drive one crazy!Т

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his remark, with variations. СI shall sit here,Т he said, Сon and off, for days and days.Т

СBut what am I to do?Т said Alice.

СAnything you like,Т said the Footman, and began whistling.

СOh, thereТs no use in talking to him,Т said Alice desperately: СheТs perfectly idiotic!Т And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a threelegged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

СThereТs certainly too much pepper in that soup!Т Alice said to herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling alternately without a momentТs pause. The only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

СPlease would you tell me,Т said Alice, a little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, Сwhy your cat grins like that?Т

СItТs a Cheshire cat[23 - Cheshire cat Ц чеширский кот. ќбраз наве€н поговоркой Ђухмыл€етс€, как чеширский котї.  роме того, утверждают, что Ћьюис  эрролл видел изображение улыбающегос€ кота в церкви  рофтон“ис, где его отец служил ректором],Т said the Duchess, Сand thatТs why. Pig!Т

She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again: Ц

СI didnТt know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didnТt know that cats COULD grin.Т

СThey all can,Т said the Duchess; Сand most of Тem do.Т

СI donТt know of any that do,Т Alice said very politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.

СYou donТt know much,Т said the Duchess; Сand thatТs a fact.Т

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess[24 -  онечно, это пароди€, но в ¬икторианскую эпоху кухарка была одной из ключевых фигур в доме. ’оз€йка должна была вс€чески ублажать ее, потому что Ђв расстройствеї и Ђот нервовї та могла начать портить блюда. «десь кухарка €вно не в духе, и в супе полно перца.] and the baby Цthe fireirons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

СOh, PLEASE mind what youТre doing!Т cried Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of terror. СOh, there goes his PRECIOUS noseТ; as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.

СIf everybody minded their own business,Т the Duchess said in a hoarse growl, Сthe world would go round a deal faster than it does.Т

СWhich would NOT be an advantage,Т said Alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. СJust think of what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes twentyfour hours to turn round on its axisЦТ

СTalking of axes,Т said the Duchess, Сchop off her head!Т

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: СTwentyfour hours, I THINK; or is it twelve? IЦТ

СOh, donТt bother ME,Т said the Duchess; СI never could abide figures!Т And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of every line:

		СSpeak roughly to your little boy,[25 - СSpeak roughly to your little boyТ Ц это пароди€ на стихотворение Ђ√оворите м€гкої. ќдни источники указывают в качестве его автора ƒэвида Ѕейтса, другие Ц √.”. Ћэнгфорда.]
		$$$And beat him when he sneezes:
		He only does it to annoy,
		$$$Because he knows it teases.Т

		CHORUS.
		(In which the cook and the baby joined): Ц

		СWow! wow! wow!Т

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words: Ц

		СI speak severely to my boy,
		$$$I beat him when he sneezes;
		For he can thoroughly enjoy
		$$$The pepper when he pleases!Т

		CHORUS.

		СWow! wow! wow!Т

СHere! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!Т the Duchess said to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. СI must go and get ready to play croquet with the Queen,Т and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw a fryingpan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queershaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, Сjust like a starfish,Т thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting like a steamengine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air. СIF I donТt take this child away with me,Т thought Alice, СtheyТre sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldnТt it be murder to leave it behind?Т She said the last words out loud, and the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time). СDonТt grunt,Т said Alice; СthatТs not at all a proper way of expressing yourself.Т

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had a VERY turnup nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not like the look of the thing at all. СBut perhaps it was only sobbing,Т she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.

No, there were no tears. СIf youТre going to turn into a pig, my dear,Т said Alice, seriously, СIТll have nothing more to do with you. Mind now!Т The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, СNow, what am I to do with this creature when I get it home?Т when it grunted again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could be NO mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it trot away quietly into the wood. СIf it had grown up,Т she said to herself, Сit would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.Т And she began thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying to herself, Сif one only knew the right way to change themЦТ when she was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards[26 - Yards Ц €рды, британские единицы измерени€ рассто€ни€. 1 €рд = 0,91 см.] off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked goodnatured, she thought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

СCheshire Puss,Т she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider. СCome, itТs pleased so far,Т thought Alice, and she went on. СWould you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?Т

СThat depends a good deal on where you want to get to,Т said the Cat.

СI donТt much care whereЦТ said Alice.

СThen it doesnТt matter which way you go,Т said the Cat.

СЦso long as I get SOMEWHERE,Т Alice added as an explanation.

СOh, youТre sure to do that,Т said the Cat, Сif you only walk long enough.Т

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question. СWhat sort of people live about here?Т

СIn THAT direction,Т the Cat said, waving its right paw round, Сlives a Hatter: and in THAT direction,Т waving the other paw, Сlives a March Hare. Visit either you like: theyТre both mad.[27 - ”стойчивые выражени€ mad as a hatter и mad as a March hare означают Ђсовершенно чокнутыйї. —читалось, что в марте зайцы ведут себ€ так же, как мартовские коты и кошки. ј использование ртути в изготовлении шл€п вызывало соответствующее отравление у шл€пников.]Т

СBut I donТt want to go among mad people,Т Alice remarked.

СOh, you canТt help that,Т said the Cat: СweТre all mad here. IТm mad. YouТre mad.Т

СHow do you know IТm mad?Т said Alice.

СYou must be,Т said the Cat, Сor you wouldnТt have come here.Т

Alice didnТt think that proved it at all; however, she went on СAnd how do you know that youТre mad?Т

СTo begin with,Т said the Cat, Сa dogТs not mad. You grant that?Т

СI suppose so,Т said Alice.

СWell, then,Т the Cat went on, Сyou see, a dog growls when itТs angry, and wags its tail when itТs pleased. Now I growl when IТm pleased, and wag my tail when IТm angry. Therefore IТm mad.Т

СI call it purring, not growling,Т said Alice.

СCall it what you like,Т said the Cat. СDo you play croquet with the Queen today?Т

СI should like it very much,Т said Alice, Сbut I havenТt been invited yet.Т

СYouТll see me there,Т said the Cat, and vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.

СBythebye, what became of the baby?Т said the Cat. СIТd nearly forgotten to ask.Т

СIt turned into a pig,Т Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back in a natural way.

СI thought it would,Т said the Cat, and vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in which the March Hare was said to live. СIТve seen hatters before,Т she said to herself; Сthe March Hare will be much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it wonТt be raving madЦat least not so mad as it was in March.Т As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

СDid you say pig, or fig?Т said the Cat.

СI said pig,Т replied Alice; Сand I wish you wouldnТt keep appearing and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.Т

СAll right,Т said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

СWell! IТve often seen a cat without a grin,Т thought Alice; Сbut a grin without a cat! ItТs the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!Т

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself СSuppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost wish IТd gone to see the Hatter instead!Т




Chapter VII

A Mad Tea-Party


There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. СVery uncomfortable for the Dormouse,Т thought Alice; Сonly, as itТs asleep, I suppose it doesnТt mind.Т

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at one corner of it: СNo room! No room!Т they cried out when they saw Alice coming. СThereТs PLENTY of room!Т said Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large armchair at one end of the table.

СHave some wine,Т the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea. СI donТt see any wine,Т she remarked.

СThere isnТt any,Т said the March Hare.

СThen it wasnТt very civil of you to offer it,Т said Alice angrily.

СIt wasnТt very civil of you to sit down without being invited,Т said the March Hare.

СI didnТt know it was YOUR table,Т said Alice; СitТs laid for a great many more than three.Т

СYour hair wants cutting,Т said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

СYou should learn not to make personal remarks,Т Alice said with some severity; СitТs very rude.Т

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he SAID was, СWhy is a raven like a writingdesk?Т

СCome, we shall have some fun now!Т thought Alice. СIТm glad theyТve begun asking riddles. Ц I believe I can guess that,Т she added aloud.

СDo you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?Т said the March Hare.

СExactly so,Т said Alice.

СThen you should say what you mean,Т the March Hare went on.

СI do,Т Alice hastily replied; Сat least Ц at least I mean what I say Ц thatТs the same thing, you know.Т

СNot the same thing a bit!Т said the Hatter. СYou might just as well say that УI see what I eatФ is the same thing as УI eat what I seeФ!Т

СYou might just as well say,Т added the March Hare, Сthat УI like what I getФ is the same thing as УI get what I likeФ!Т

СYou might just as well say,Т added the Dormouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep, Сthat УI breathe when I sleepФ is the same thing as УI sleep when I breatheФ!Т

СIt IS the same thing with you,Т said the Hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and writingdesks, which wasnТt much.

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. СWhat day of the month is it?Т he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

Alice considered a little, and then said СThe fourth.[28 - The fourth. Ц 4 ма€ Ц день рождени€ јлисы Ћидделл. ћес€ц упоминалс€ в предыдущей главе.]Т

СTwo days wrong!Т sighed the Hatter. СI told you butter wouldnТt suit the works!Т he added looking angrily at the March Hare.

СIt was the BEST butter,Т the March Hare meekly replied.

СYes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,Т the Hatter grumbled: Сyou shouldnТt have put it in with the breadknife.Т

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, СIt was the BEST butter, you know.Т

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. СWhat a funny watch!Т she remarked. СIt tells the day of the month, and doesnТt tell what oТclock it is!Т

СWhy should it?Т muttered the Hatter. СDoes YOUR watch tell you what year it is?Т

СOf course not,Т Alice replied very readily: Сbut thatТs because it stays the same year for such a long time together.Т

СWhich is just the case with MINE,Т said the Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The HatterТs remark seemed to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. СI donТt quite understand you,Т she said, as politely as she could.

СThe Dormouse is asleep again,Т said the Hatter, and he poured a little hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its eyes, СOf course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.Т

СHave you guessed the riddle yet?Т the Hatter said, turning to Alice again.

СNo, I give it up,Т Alice replied: СwhatТs the answer?Т

СI havenТt the slightest idea,Т said the Hatter.

СNor I,Т said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. СI think you might do something better with the time,Т she said, Сthan waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.Т

СIf you knew Time as well as I do,Т said the Hatter, Сyou wouldnТt talk about wasting IT. ItТs HIM.Т

СI donТt know what you mean,Т said Alice.

СOf course you donТt!Т the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously. СI dare say you never even spoke to Time!Т

СPerhaps not,Т Alice cautiously replied: Сbut I know I have to beat time when I learn music.Т

СAh! that accounts for it,Т said the Hatter. СHe wonТt stand beating. Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, heТd do almost anything you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine oТclock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: youТd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Halfpast one, time for dinner!Т

(СI only wish it was,Т the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

СThat would be grand, certainly,Т said Alice thoughtfully: Сbut then Ц I shouldnТt be hungry for it, you know.Т

СNot at first, perhaps,Т said the Hatter: Сbut you could keep it to halfpast one as long as you liked.Т

СIs that the way YOU manage?Т Alice asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. СNot I!Т he replied. СWe quarrelled last March Ц just before HE went mad, you knowЦТ (pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) СЦit was at the great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

		УTwinkle, twinkle, little bat![29 - УTwinkle, twinkle, little bat!Ф Ц Ёто пароди€ на стихотворение ƒжейн “ейлор (1783Ц1824) Ђ«вездаї.]
		How I wonder what youТre at!Ф

You know the song, perhaps?Т

СIТve heard something like it,Т said Alice.

СIt goes on, you know,Т the Hatter continued, Сin this way: Ц

		УUp above the world you fly,
		Like a teatray in the sky.
		$$$$Twinkle, twinkleЦФТ

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep СTwinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkleЦТ and went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop.

СWell, IТd hardly finished the first verse,Т said the Hatter, Сwhen the Queen jumped up and bawled out, УHeТs murdering the time! Off with his head!ФТ

СHow dreadfully savage!Т exclaimed Alice.

СAnd ever since that,Т the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, Сhe wonТt do a thing I ask! ItТs always six oТclock now.Т

A bright idea came into AliceТs head. СIs that the reason so many teathings are put out here?Т she asked.

СYes, thatТs it,Т said the Hatter with a sigh: СitТs always teatime, and weТve no time to wash the things between whiles.Т

СThen you keep moving round, I suppose?Т said Alice.

СExactly so,Т said the Hatter: Сas the things get used up.Т

СBut what happens when you come to the beginning again?Т Alice ventured to ask.

СSuppose we change the subject,Т the March Hare interrupted, yawning. СIТm getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.Т

СIТm afraid I donТt know one,Т said Alice, rather alarmed at the proposal.

СThen the Dormouse shall!Т they both cried. СWake up, Dormouse!Т And they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. СI wasnТt asleep,Т he said in a hoarse, feeble voice: СI heard every word you fellows were saying.Т

СTell us a story!Т said the March Hare.

СYes, please do!Т pleaded Alice.

СAnd be quick about it,Т added the Hatter, Сor youТll be asleep again before itТs done.Т

СOnce upon a time there were three little sisters,Т the Dormouse began in a great hurry; Сand their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie[30 - Elsie, Lacie and Tillie Ц здесь автор снова называет сестер Ћидделл, принимавших участие в лодочной прогулке. Elsie произноситс€ так же, как L.C. Ц инициалы старшей сестры, Ћорины Ўарлотты (Lorina Charlotte). Lacie Ц это анаграмма имени Alice. Tillie Ц сокращение от Matilda, а это было прозвище Ёдит.]; and they lived at the bottom of a wellЦТ

СWhat did they live on?Т said Alice, who always took a great interest in questions of eating and drinking.

СThey lived on treacle,Т said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or two.

СThey couldnТt have done that, you know,Т Alice gently remarked; СtheyТd have been ill.Т

СSo they were,Т said the Dormouse; СVERY ill.Т

Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: СBut why did they live at the bottom of a well?Т

СTake some more tea,Т the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

СIТve had nothing yet,Т Alice replied in an offended tone, Сso I canТt take more.Т

СYou mean you canТt take LESS,Т said the Hatter: СitТs very easy to take MORE than nothing.Т

СNobody asked YOUR opinion,Т said Alice.

СWhoТs making personal remarks now?Т the Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some tea and breadandbutter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and repeated her question. СWhy did they live at the bottom of a well?Т

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then said, СIt was a treaclewell.Т

СThereТs no such thing!Т Alice was beginning very angrily, but the Hatter and the March Hare went СSh! sh!Т and the Dormouse sulkily remarked, СIf you canТt be civil, youТd better finish the story for yourself.Т

СNo, please go on!Т Alice said very humbly; СI wonТt interrupt again. I dare say there may be ONE.Т

СOne, indeed!Т said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to go on. СAnd so these three little sisters Ц they were learning to draw, you knowЦТ

СWhat did they draw?Т said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

СTreacle,Т said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

СI want a clean cup,Т interrupted the Hatter: СletТs all move one place on.Т

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare moved into the DormouseТs place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset the milkjug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very cautiously: СBut I donТt understand. Where did they draw the treacle from?Т

СYou can draw water out of a waterwell,Т said the Hatter; Сso I should think you could draw treacle out of a treaclewell Ц eh, stupid?Т

СBut they were IN the well,Т Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing to notice this last remark.

СOf course they wereТ, said the Dormouse; СЦwell in.Т

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for some time without interrupting it.

СThey were learning to draw,Т the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; Сand they drew all manner of things Ц everything that begins with an MЦТ

СWhy with an M?Т said Alice.

СWhy not?Т said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a little shriek, and went on: СЦthat begins with an M, such as mousetraps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness Ц you know you say things are Сmuch of a muchnessТ Ц did you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?Т

СReally, now you ask me,Т said Alice, very much confused, СI donТt thinkЦТ

СThen you shouldnТt talk,Т said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.

СAt any rate IТll never go THERE again!Т said Alice as she picked her way through the wood. СItТs the stupidest teaparty I ever was at in all my life!Т

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it. СThatТs very curious!Т she thought. СBut everythingТs curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.Т And in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table. СNow, IТll manage better this time,Т she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little passage: and THEN Ц she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flowerbeds and the cool fountains.




Chapter VIII

The QueenТs Croquet-Ground


A large rosetree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red.[31 - Ёто вполне очевидна€ отсылка к войне јлой и белой розы, династической войне между Ћанкастерами и …орками, чьими символами были ала€ и бела€ роза соответственно.] Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, СLook out now, Five! DonТt go splashing paint over me like that!Т

СI couldnТt help it,Т said Five, in a sulky tone; СSeven jogged my elbow.Т

On which Seven looked up and said, СThatТs right, Five! Always lay the blame on others!Т

СYOUТD better not talk!Т said Five. СI heard the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!Т

СWhat for?Т said the one who had spoken first.

СThatТs none of YOUR business, Two!Т said Seven.

СYes, it IS his business!Т said Five, Сand IТll tell him Ц it was for bringing the cook tuliproots instead of onions.Т

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun СWell, of all the unjust thingsЦТ when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

СWould you tell me,Т said Alice, a little timidly, Сwhy you are painting those roses?Т

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low voice, СWhy the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a RED rosetree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So you see, Miss, weТre doing our best, afore she comes, toЦТ At this moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out СThe Queen! The Queen!Т and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the KingТs crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; Сand besides, what would be the use of a procession,Т thought she, Сif people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldnТt see it?Т So she stood still where she was, and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the Queen said severely СWho is this?Т She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

СIdiot!Т said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to Alice, she went on, СWhatТs your name, child?Т

СMy name is Alice, so please your Majesty,Т said Alice very politely; but she added, to herself, СWhy, theyТre only a pack of cards, after all. I neednТt be afraid of them!Т

СAnd who are THESE?Т said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.

СHow should I know?Т said Alice, surprised at her own courage. СItТs no business of MINE.Т

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment like a wild beast, screamed СOff with her head! OffЦТ

СNonsense!Т said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said СConsider, my dear: she is only a child!Т

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave СTurn them over!Т

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

СGet up!Т said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.

СLeave off that!Т screamed the Queen. СYou make me giddy.Т And then, turning to the rosetree, she went on, СWhat HAVE you been doing here?Т

СMay it please your Majesty,Т said Two, in a very humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, Сwe were tryingЦТ

СI see!Т said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses. СOff with their heads!Т and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

СYou shanТt be beheaded!Т said Alice, and she put them into a large flowerpot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others.

СAre their heads off?Т shouted the Queen.

СTheir heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!Т the soldiers shouted in reply.

СThatТs right!Т shouted the Queen. СCan you play croquet?Т

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was evidently meant for her.

СYes!Т shouted Alice.

СCome on, then!Т roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

СItТs Ц itТs a very fine day!Т said a timid voice at her side. She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

СVery,Т said Alice; СЦwhereТs the Duchess?Т

СHush! Hush!Т said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered СSheТs under sentence of execution.Т

СWhat for?Т said Alice.

СDid you say УWhat a pity!Ф?Т the Rabbit asked.

СNo, I didnТt,Т said Alice: СI donТt think itТs at all a pity. I said УWhat for?ФТ

She boxed the QueenТs earsЦТ the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little scream of laughter. СOh, hush!Т the Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. СThe Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the Queen saidЦТ

СGet to your places!Т shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquetground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubledup soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting СOff with his head!Т or СOff with her head!Т about once in a minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, Сand then,Т thought she, Сwhat would become of me? TheyТre dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that thereТs any one left alive!Т

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself СItТs the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.Т

СHow are you getting on?Т said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. СItТs no use speaking to it,Т she thought, Сtill its ears have come, or at least one of them.Т In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

СI donТt think they play at all fairly,Т Alice began, in rather a complaining tone, Сand they all quarrel so dreadfully one canТt hear oneself speak Ц and they donТt seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them Ц and youТve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, thereТs the arch IТve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the ground Ц and I should have croqueted the QueenТs hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!Т

СHow do you like the Queen?Т said the Cat in a low voice.

СNot at all,Т said Alice: СsheТs so extremelyЦТ Just then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, СЦlikely to win, that itТs hardly worth while finishing the game.Т

The Queen smiled and passed on.

СWho ARE you talking to?Т said the King, going up to Alice, and looking at the CatТs head with great curiosity.

СItТs a friend of mine Ц a Cheshire Cat,Т said Alice: Сallow me to introduce it.Т

СI donТt like the look of it at all,Т said the King: Сhowever, it may kiss my hand if it likes.Т

СIТd rather not,Т the Cat remarked.

СDonТt be impertinent,Т said the King, Сand donТt look at me like that!Т He got behind Alice as he spoke.

СA cat may look at a king,Т[32 - A cat may look at a king Ц Ёта пословица означает, что, какой бы важной персоной человек ни был, на него все равно могут и будут смотреть те, чей статус ниже. »спользование пословиц и устойчивых выражений в буквальном смысле дл€ описани€ ситуации Ц один из характерных приемов британского юмора.] said Alice. СIТve read that in some book, but I donТt remember where.Т

СWell, it must be removed,Т said the King very decidedly, and he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, СMy dear! I wish you would have this cat removed!Т

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. СOff with his head!Т she said, without even looking round.

СIТll fetch the executioner myself,Т said the King eagerly, and he hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the QueenТs voice in the distance, screaming with passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: Сbut it doesnТt matter much,Т thought Alice, Сas all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.Т So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.

The executionerТs argument was, that you couldnТt cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasnТt going to begin at HIS time of life.

The KingТs argument was, that anything that had a head could be beheaded, and that you werenТt to talk nonsense.

The QueenТs argument was, that if something wasnТt done about it in less than no time sheТd have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but СIt belongs to the Duchess: youТd better ask HER about it.Т

СSheТs in prison,Т the Queen said to the executioner: Сfetch her here.Т And the executioner went off like an arrow.

The CatТs head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the Dutchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.




Chapter IX

The Mock TurtleТs Story


СYou canТt think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!Т said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into AliceТs, and they walked off together.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

СWhen IТM a Duchess,Т she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone though), СI wonТt have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does very well without Ц Maybe itТs always pepper that makes people hottempered,Т she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, Сand vinegar that makes them sour Ц and camomile that makes them bitter Ц and Ц and barleysugar and such things that make children sweettempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldnТt be so stingy about it, you knowЦТ

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. СYouТre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I canТt tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in a bit.Т

СPerhaps it hasnТt one,Т Alice ventured to remark.

СTut, tut, child!Т said the Duchess. СEverythingТs got a moral, if only you can find it.Т And she squeezed herself up closer to AliceТs side as she spoke.

Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin upon AliceТs shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.

СThe gameТs going on rather better now,Т she said, by way of keeping up the conversation a little.

СТTis so,Т said the Duchess: Сand the moral of that is Ц УOh, Тtis love, Тtis love, that makes the world go round!ФТ

СSomebody said,Т Alice whispered, Сthat itТs done by everybody minding their own business!Т

СAh, well! It means much the same thing,Т said the Duchess, digging her sharp little chin into AliceТs shoulder as she added, Сand the moral of THAT is Ц УTake care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves.Ф[33 - Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves Ц это вполне узнаваема€ пословица Take care of the pence and the pounds will take care of themselves. √ерцогин€ часто использует поговорки и поучительные высказывани€, хорошо известные викторианским читател€м.]Т

СHow fond she is of finding morals in things!Т Alice thought to herself.

СI dare say youТre wondering why I donТt put my arm round your waist,Т the Duchess said after a pause: Сthe reason is, that IТm doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?Т

СHE might bite,Т Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to have the experiment tried.

СVery true,Т said the Duchess: Сflamingoes and mustard both bite. And the moral of that is Ц УBirds of a feather flock together.ФТ

СOnly mustard isnТt a bird,Т Alice remarked.

СRight, as usual,Т said the Duchess: Сwhat a clear way you have of putting things!Т

СItТs a mineral, I THINK,Т said Alice.

СOf course it is,Т said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to everything that Alice said; СthereТs a large mustardmine near here. And the moral of that is Ц УThe more there is of mine, the less there is of yours.ФТ

СOh, I know!Т exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark, СitТs a vegetable. It doesnТt look like one, but it is.Т

СI quite agree with you,Т said the Duchess; Сand the moral of that is Ц УBe what you would seem to beФ Ц or if youТd like it put more simply Ц УNever imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.ФТ

СI think I should understand that better,Т Alice said very politely, Сif I had it written down: but I canТt quite follow it as you say it.Т

СThatТs nothing to what I could say if I chose,Т the Duchess replied, in a pleased tone.

СPray donТt trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,Т said Alice.

СOh, donТt talk about trouble!Т said the Duchess. СI make you a present of everything IТve said as yet.Т

СA cheap sort of present!Т thought Alice. СIТm glad they donТt give birthday presents like that!Т But she did not venture to say it out loud.

СThinking again?Т the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp little chin.

СIТve a right to think,Т said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to feel a little worried.

СJust about as much right,Т said the Duchess, Сas pigs have to fly; and the mЦТ

But here, to AliceТs great surprise, the DuchessТs voice died away, even in the middle of her favourite word Сmoral,Т and the arm that was linked into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

СA fine day, your Majesty!Т the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

СNow, I give you fair warning,Т shouted the Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; Сeither you or your head must be off, and that in about half no time! Take your choice!Т

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

СLetТs go on with the game,Т the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the croquetground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the QueenТs absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a momentТs delay would cost them their lives.

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with the other players, and shouting СOff with his head!Т or СOff with her head!Т Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, СHave you seen the Mock Turtle yet?Т

СNo,Т said Alice. СI donТt even know what a Mock Turtle is.Т

СItТs the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,Т[34 - Ђ‘альшивый черепаховый супї в действительности варили из тел€чьих головы, ножек с копытами и хвоста. ќн готовилс€ на гов€жьем бульоне с мадерой. ѕоэтому у нарисованного ƒжоном “енниелом персонажа тел€чь€ голова, копыта и хвост.] said the Queen.

СI never saw one, or heard of one,Т said Alice.

СCome on, then,Т said the Queen, Сand he shall tell you his history,Т

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, to the company generally, СYou are all pardoned.Т СCome, THATТS a good thing!Т she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (IF you donТt know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) СUp, lazy thing!Т said the Queen, Сand take this young lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some executions I have orderedТ; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. СWhat fun!Т said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

СWhat IS the fun?Т said Alice.

СWhy, SHE,Т said the Gryphon. СItТs all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you know. Come on!Т

СEverybody says Уcome on!Ф here,Т thought Alice, as she went slowly after it: СI never was so ordered about in all my life, never!Т

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She pitied him deeply. СWhat is his sorrow?Т she asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, СItТs all his fancy, that: he hasnТt got no sorrow, you know. Come on!Т

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

СThis here young lady,Т said the Gryphon, Сshe wants for to know your history, she do.Т

СIТll tell it her,Т said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: Сsit down, both of you, and donТt speak a word till IТve finished.Т

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to herself, СI donТt see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesnТt begin.Т But she waited patiently.

СOnce,Т said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, СI was a real Turtle.Т

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an occasional exclamation of СHjckrrh!Т from the Gryphon, and the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and saying, СThank you, sir, for your interesting story,Т but she could not help thinking there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

СWhen we were little,Т the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, Сwe went to school in the sea. The master was an old Turtle Ц we used to call him TortoiseЦТ

СWhy did you call him Tortoise, if he wasnТt one?Т Alice asked.

СWe called him Tortoise because he taught us,Т[35 - –ассказ геро€ полон таких шуток (основанных на созвучии различных слов). јвтор объ€сн€ет только часть из них.] said the Mock Turtle angrily: Сreally you are very dull!Т

СYou ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,Т added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, СDrive on, old fellow! DonТt be all day about it!Т and he went on in these words:

СYes, we went to school in the sea, though you maynТt believe itЦТ

СI never said I didnТt!Т interrupted Alice.

СYou did,Т said the Mock Turtle.

СHold your tongue!Т added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again. The Mock Turtle went on.

СWe had the best of educations Ц in fact, we went to school every dayЦТ

СIТVE been to a dayschool, too,Т said Alice; Сyou neednТt be so proud as all that.Т

СWith extras?Т asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

СYes,Т said Alice, Сwe learned French and music.Т

СAnd washing?Т said the Mock Turtle.

СCertainly not!Т said Alice indignantly.

СAh! then yours wasnТt a really good school,Т said the Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief. СNow at OURS they had at the end of the bill, УFrench, music, AND WASHING Ц extra.Ф[36 - УFrench, music, AND WASHING Ц extraФ Ц это строчка из поступившего из школы счета: некоторые услуги и предметы оплачивались отдельно (сверх установленной платы за обучение). ѕравда, Ђстиркаї относитс€ скорее к школеинтернату.]Т

СYou couldnТt have wanted it much,Т said Alice; Сliving at the bottom of the sea.Т

СI couldnТt afford to learn it.Т said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. СI only took the regular course.Т

СWhat was that?Т inquired Alice.

СReeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,Т the Mock Turtle replied; Сand then the different branches of Arithmetic Ц Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.Т[37 - Reeling and Writhing, Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision Ц это школьные предметы: чтение и письмо (Reading and Writing) и арифметические операции: сложение, вычитание, умножение и деление (Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division).]

СI never heard of УUglification,ФТ Alice ventured to say. СWhat is it?Т

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. СWhat! Never heard of uglifying!Т it exclaimed. СYou know what to beautify is, I suppose?Т

СYes,Т said Alice doubtfully: Сit means Ц to Ц make Цanything Ц prettier.Т

СWell, then,Т the Gryphon went on, Сif you donТt know what to uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.Т

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said СWhat else had you to learn?Т

СWell, there was Mystery,Т the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, СЦMystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography: then Drawling Ц the Drawlingmaster was an old congereel, that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.Т[38 - Mystery, Seaography, Drawling, Stretching and Fainting in Coils Ц это также школьные предметы: истори€ (history), географи€ (geography), рисование (drawing), наброски (sketching) и живопись маслом (painting in oils).]

СWhat was THAT like?Т said Alice.

СWell, I canТt show it you myself,Т the Mock Turtle said: СIТm too stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.Т

СHadnТt time,Т said the Gryphon: СI went to the Classics master, though. He was an old crab, HE was.Т

СI never went to him,Т the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: Сhe taught Laughing and Grief,[39 - Laughing and Grief = Latin and Greek.sss] they used to say.Т

СSo he did, so he did,Т said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

СAnd how many hours a day did you do lessons?Т said Alice, in a hurry to change the subject.

СTen hours the first day,Т said the Mock Turtle: Сnine the next, and so on.Т

СWhat a curious plan!Т exclaimed Alice.

СThatТs the reason theyТre called lessons,Т the Gryphon remarked: Сbecause they lessen from day to day.Т

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little before she made her next remark. СThen the eleventh day must have been a holiday?Т

СOf course it was,Т said the Mock Turtle.

СAnd how did you manage on the twelfth?Т Alice went on eagerly.

СThatТs enough about lessons,Т the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided tone: Сtell her something about the games now.Т




Chapter X

The Lobster Quadrille[40 - Quadrille Ц это танец, состо€вший из определенной последовательности фигур и исполн€вшийс€ четырьм€ парами, выстроившимис€ квадратом.]


The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice. СSame as if he had a bone in his throat,Т said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on again: Ц

СYou may not have lived much under the seaЦТ (СI havenТt,Т said Alice) Ц Сand perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobsterЦТ (Alice began to say СI once tastedЦТ but checked herself hastily, and said СNo, neverТ) СЦso you can have no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille is!Т

СNo, indeed,Т said Alice. СWhat sort of a dance is it?Т

СWhy,Т said the Gryphon, Сyou first form into a line along the seashoreЦТ

СTwo lines!Т cried the Mock Turtle. СSeals, turtles, salmon, and so on; then, when youТve cleared all the jellyfish out of the wayЦТ

СTHAT generally takes some time,Т interrupted the Gryphon.

СЦyou advance twiceЦТ

СEach with a lobster as a partner!Т cried the Gryphon.

СOf course,Т the Mock Turtle said: Сadvance twice, set to partnersЦТ

СЦchange lobsters, and retire in same order,Т continued the Gryphon.

СThen, you know,Т the Mock Turtle went on, Сyou throw theЦТ

СThe lobsters!Т shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

СЦas far out to sea as you canЦТ

СSwim after them!Т screamed the Gryphon.

СTurn a somersault in the sea!Т cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly about.

СChange lobsterТs again!Т yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

СBack to land again, and thatТs all the first figure,Т said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.

СIt must be a very pretty dance,Т said Alice timidly.

СWould you like to see a little of it?Т said the Mock Turtle.

СVery much indeed,Т said Alice.

СCome, letТs try the first figure!Т said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon. СWe can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?Т

СOh, YOU sing,Т said the Gryphon. СIТve forgotten the words.Т

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly:Ц

		СУWill you walk a little faster?Ф said a whiting to a snail.[41 - СУWill you walk a little faster?Ф said a whiting to a snail Ц это сочинение наве€но стихотворением ћэри ’ауитт (1799Ц1888) Ђѕаук и мухаї.]
		УThereТs a porpoise close behind us, and heТs treading on my tail.
		See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
		They are waiting on the shingleЦwill you come and join the dance?

		Will you, wonТt you, will you, wonТt you, will you join the dance?
		Will you, wonТt you, will you, wonТt you, wonТt you join the dance?

		СУYou can really have no notion how delightful it will be
		When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!Т
		But the snail replied СToo far, too far!Т and gave a look askance Ц
		Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
		Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
		Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

		СУWhat matters it how far we go?Ф his scaly friend replied.
		УThere is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
		The further off from England the nearer is to France Ц
		Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

		Will you, wonТt you, will you, wonТt you, will you join the dance?
		Will you, wonТt you, will you, wonТt you, wonТt you join the dance?ФТ

СThank you, itТs a very interesting dance to watch,Т said Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: Сand I do so like that curious song about the whiting!Т

СOh, as to the whiting,Т said the Mock Turtle, Сthey Ц youТve seen them, of course?Т

СYes,Т said Alice, СIТve often seen them at dinnЦТ she checked herself hastily.

СI donТt know where Dinn may be,Т said the Mock Turtle, Сbut if youТve seen them so often, of course you know what theyТre like.Т

СI believe so,Т Alice replied thoughtfully. СThey have their tails in their mouths Ц and theyТre all over crumbs.Т

СYouТre wrong about the crumbs,Т said the Mock Turtle: Сcrumbs would all wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and the reason isЦТ here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes. Ц СTell her about the reason and all that,Т he said to the Gryphon.

СThe reason is,Т said the Gryphon, Сthat they WOULD go with the lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldnТt get them out again. ThatТs all.Т

СThank you,Т said Alice, СitТs very interesting. I never knew so much about a whiting before.Т

СI can tell you more than that, if you like,Т said the Gryphon. СDo you know why itТs called a whiting?Т

СI never thought about it,Т said Alice. СWhy?Т

СIT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.Т the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. СDoes the boots and shoes!Т she repeated in a wondering tone.

СWhy, what are YOUR shoes done with?Т said the Gryphon. СI mean, what makes them so shiny?Т

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her answer. СTheyТre done with blacking, I believe.Т

СBoots and shoes under the sea,Т the Gryphon went on in a deep voice, Сare done with a whiting. Now you know.Т

СAnd what are they made of?Т Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

СSoles and eels,[42 - Soles and eels Ц Ђкамбалы и угриї звучит почти так же, как soles and heels Ц Ђподошвы и каблукиї.] of course,Т the Gryphon replied rather impatiently: Сany shrimp could have told you that.Т

СIf IТd been the whiting,Т said Alice, whose thoughts were still running on the song, СIТd have said to the porpoise, УKeep back, please: we donТt want YOU with us!ФТ

СThey were obliged to have him with them,Т the Mock Turtle said: Сno wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.Т

СWouldnТt it really?Т said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

СOf course not,Т said the Mock Turtle: Сwhy, if a fish came to ME, and told me he was going a journey, I should say УWith what porpoise?ФТ

СDonТt you mean УpurposeФ?Т said Alice.

СI mean what I say,Т the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And the Gryphon added СCome, letТs hear some of YOUR adventures.Т

СI could tell you my adventuresЦbeginning from this morning,Т said Alice a little timidly: Сbut itТs no use going back to yesterday, because I was a different person then.Т

СExplain all that,Т said the Mock Turtle.

СNo, no! The adventures first,Т said the Gryphon in an impatient tone: Сexplanations take such a dreadful time.Т

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about her repeating СYOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,Т to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said СThatТs very curious.Т

СItТs all about as curious as it can be,Т said the Gryphon.

СIt all came different!Т the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. СI should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to begin.Т He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.

СStand up and repeat УТTIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,ФТ said the Gryphon.

СHow the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!Т thought Alice; СI might as well be at school at once.Т However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came very queer indeed: Ц

		СТTis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,[43 - УТTis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declareФ Ц это пароди€ на стихотворение »саака ”оттса ЂЋент€йї.]
		УYou have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.Ф
		As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
		Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.

		When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
		And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
		But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
		His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.Т

СThatТs different from what I used to say when I was a child,Т said the Gryphon.

СWell, I never heard it before,Т said the Mock Turtle; Сbut it sounds uncommon nonsense.Т

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands, wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.

СI should like to have it explained,Т said the Mock Turtle.

СShe canТt explain it,Т said the Gryphon hastily. СGo on with the next verse.Т

СBut about his toes?Т the Mock Turtle persisted. СHow COULD he turn them out with his nose, you know?Т

СItТs the first position in dancing.Т Alice said; but was dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

СGo on with the next verse,Т the Gryphon repeated impatiently: Сit begins СI passed by his garden.ТС

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice: Ц

		СI passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
		How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pieЦТ

		The Panther took piecrust, and gravy, and meat,
		While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
		When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
		Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
		While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
		And concluded the banquetЦТ

СWhat IS the use of repeating all that stuff,Т the Mock Turtle interrupted, Сif you donТt explain it as you go on? ItТs by far the most confusing thing I ever heard!Т

СYes, I think youТd better leave off,Т said the Gryphon: and Alice was only too glad to do so.

СShall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?Т the Gryphon went on. СOr would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?Т

СOh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,Т Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, СHm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her УTurtle Soup,Ф will you, old fellow?Т

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing this: Ц

		СBeautiful Soup, so rich and green,[44 - СBeautiful Soup, so rich and greenТ Ц это пароди€ на песню Ђ¬ечерн€€ звездаї ƒжеймса ћ. —эйл€.]
		Waiting in a hot tureen!
		Who for such dainties would not stoop?
		Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
		Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
		$$$Beauootiful Soooop!
		$$$Beauootiful Soooop!
		Soooop of the eeevening,
		$$$Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

		СBeautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
		Game, or any other dish?
		Who would not give all else for two
		pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
		Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
		$$$Beauootiful Soooop!
		$$$Beauootiful Soooop!
		Soooop of the eeevening,
		$$$Beautiful, beautyFUL SOUP!Т

СChorus again!Т cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun to repeat it, when a cry of СThe trialТs beginning!Т was heard in the distance.

СCome on!Т cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.

СWhat trial is it?Т Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only answered СCome on!Т and ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words: Ц

		СSoooop of the eeevening,
		Beautiful, beautiful Soup!Т




Chapter XI

Who Stole the Tarts?


The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them Ц all sorts of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them Ц СI wish theyТd get the trial done,Т she thought, Сand hand round the refreshments!Т But there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about her, to pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the name of nearly everything there. СThatТs the judge,Т she said to herself, Сbecause of his great wig.Т

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

СAnd thatТs the jurybox,Т thought Alice, Сand those twelve creatures,Т (she was obliged to say Сcreatures,Т you see, because some of them were animals, and some were birds,) СI suppose they are the jurors.Т She said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. However, СjurymenТ would have done just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. СWhat are they doing?Т Alice whispered to the Gryphon. СThey canТt have anything to put down yet, before the trialТs begun.Т

СTheyТre putting down their names,Т the Gryphon whispered in reply, Сfor fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.Т

СStupid things!Т Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, СSilence in the court!Т and the King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down Сstupid things!Т on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them didnТt know how to spell Сstupid,Т and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. СA nice muddle their slatesТll be in before the trialТs over!Т thought Alice.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

СHerald, read the accusation!Т said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows: Ц

		СThe Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,[45 - The Queen of hearts, she made some tartsЕ Ц Ёто не пароди€, а существующее детское стихотворение (автор неизвестен).]
		$$$$All on a summer day:
		The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
		$$$$And took them quite away!Т

СConsider your verdict,Т the King said to the jury.

СNot yet, not yet!Т the Rabbit hastily interrupted. СThereТs a great deal to come before that!Т

СCall the first witness,Т said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, СFirst witness!Т

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of breadandbutter in the other. СI beg pardon, your Majesty,Т he began, Сfor bringing these in: but I hadnТt quite finished my tea when I was sent for.Т

СYou ought to have finished,Т said the King. СWhen did you begin?Т

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the court, arminarm with the Dormouse. СFourteenth of March, I think it was,Т he said.

СFifteenth,Т said the March Hare.

СSixteenth,Т added the Dormouse.

СWrite that down,Т the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

СTake off your hat,Т the King said to the Hatter.

СIt isnТt mine,Т said the Hatter.

СStolen!Т the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a memorandum of the fact.

СI keep them to sell,Т the Hatter added as an explanation; СIТve none of my own. IТm a hatter.Т

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.

СGive your evidence,Т said the King; Сand donТt be nervous, or IТll have you executed on the spot.Т

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the breadandbutter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for her.

СI wish you wouldnТt squeeze so.Т said the Dormouse, who was sitting next to her. СI can hardly breathe.Т

СI canТt help it,Т said Alice very meekly: СIТm growing.Т

СYouТve no right to grow here,Т said the Dormouse.

СDonТt talk nonsense,Т said Alice more boldly: Сyou know youТre growing too.Т

СYes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,Т said the Dormouse: Сnot in that ridiculous fashion.Т And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers of the court, СBring me the list of the singers in the last concert!Т on which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

СGive your evidence,Т the King repeated angrily, Сor IТll have you executed, whether youТre nervous or not.Т

СIТm a poor man, your Majesty,Т the Hatter began, in a trembling voice, СЦand I hadnТt begun my teaЦnot above a week or so Ц and what with the breadandbutter getting so thin Ц and the twinkling of the teaЦТ

СThe twinkling of the what?Т said the King.

СIt began with the tea,Т the Hatter replied.

СOf course twinkling begins with a T!Т said the King sharply. СDo you take me for a dunce? Go on!Т

СIТm a poor man,Т the Hatter went on, Сand most things twinkled after that Ц only the March Hare saidЦТ

СI didnТt!Т the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

СYou did!Т said the Hatter.

СI deny it!Т said the March Hare.

СHe denies it,Т said the King: Сleave out that part.Т

СWell, at any rate, the Dormouse saidЦТ the Hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.

СAfter that,Т continued the Hatter, СI cut some more breadandbutterЦТ

СBut what did the Dormouse say?Т one of the jury asked.

СThat I canТt remember,Т said the Hatter.

СYou MUST remember,Т remarked the King, Сor IТll have you executed.Т

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and breadandbutter, and went down on one knee. СIТm a poor man, your Majesty,Т he began.

СYouТre a very poor speaker,Т said the King.

Here one of the guineapigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guineapig, head first, and then sat upon it.)

СIТm glad IТve seen that done,Т thought Alice. СIТve so often read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, УThere was some attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court,Ф and I never understood what it meant till now.Т

СIf thatТs all you know about it, you may stand down,Т continued the King.

СI canТt go no lower,Т said the Hatter: СIТm on the floor, as it is.Т

СThen you may SIT down,Т the King replied.

Here the other guineapig cheered, and was suppressed.

СCome, that finished the guineapigs!Т thought Alice. СNow we shall get on better.Т

СIТd rather finish my tea,Т said the Hatter, with an anxious look at the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

СYou may go,Т said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.

СЦand just take his head off outside,Т the Queen added to one of the officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to the door.

СCall the next witness!Т said the King.

The next witness was the DuchessТs cook. She carried the pepperbox in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

СGive your evidence,Т said the King.

СShanТt,Т said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice, СYour Majesty must crossexamine THIS witness.Т

СWell, if I must, I must,Т the King said, with a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, СWhat are tarts made of?Т

СPepper, mostly,Т said the cook.

СTreacle,Т said a sleepy voice behind her.

СCollar that Dormouse,Т the Queen shrieked out. СBehead that Dormouse! Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his whiskers!Т

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had disappeared.

СNever mind!Т said the King, with an air of great relief. СCall the next witness.Т And he added in an undertone to the Queen, СReally, my dear, YOU must crossexamine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead ache!Т

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, СЦfor they havenТt got much evidence YET,Т she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the name СAlice!Т




Chapter XII

AliceТs Evidence


СHere!Т cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jurybox with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.

СOh, I BEG your pardon!Т she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the jurybox, or they would die.

СThe trial cannot proceed,Т said the King in a very grave voice, Сuntil all the jurymen are back in their proper places Ц ALL,Т he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.

Alice looked at the jurybox, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got it out again, and put it right; Сnot that it signifies much,Т she said to herself; СI should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trial one way up as the other.Т

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the court.

СWhat do you know about this business?Т the King said to Alice.

СNothing,Т said Alice.

СNothing WHATEVER?Т persisted the King.

СNothing whatever,Т said Alice.

СThatТs very important,Т the King said, turning to the jury. They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit interrupted: СUNimportant, your Majesty means, of course,Т he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.

СUNimportant, of course, I meant,Т the King hastily said, and went on to himself in an undertone, Сimportant Ц unimportant Ц unimportant Ц importantЦТ as if he were trying which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down Сimportant,Т and some Сunimportant.Т Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; Сbut it doesnТt matter a bit,Т she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in his notebook, cackled out СSilence!Т and read out from his book, СRule Fortytwo. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.Т

Everybody looked at Alice.

СIТM not a mile high,Т said Alice.

СYou are,Т said the King.

СNearly two miles high,Т added the Queen.

СWell, I shanТt go, at any rate,Т said Alice: Сbesides, thatТs not a regular rule: you invented it just now.Т

СItТs the oldest rule in the book,Т said the King.

СThen it ought to be Number One,Т said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his notebook hastily. СConsider your verdict,Т he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

СThereТs more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,Т said the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; Сthis paper has just been picked up.Т

СWhatТs in it?Т said the Queen.

СI havenТt opened it yet,Т said the White Rabbit, Сbut it seems to be a letter, written by the prisoner toЦto somebody.Т

СIt must have been that,Т said the King, Сunless it was written to nobody, which isnТt usual, you know.Т

СWho is it directed to?Т said one of the jurymen.

СIt isnТt directed at all,Т said the White Rabbit; Сin fact, thereТs nothing written on the OUTSIDE.Т He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and added СIt isnТt a letter, after all: itТs a set of verses.Т

СAre they in the prisonerТs handwriting?Т asked another of they jurymen.

СNo, theyТre not,Т said the White Rabbit, Сand thatТs the queerest thing about it.Т (The jury all looked puzzled.)

СHe must have imitated somebody elseТs hand,Т said the King. (The jury all brightened up again.)

СPlease your Majesty,Т said the Knave, СI didnТt write it, and they canТt prove I did: thereТs no name signed at the end.Т

СIf you didnТt sign it,Т said the King, Сthat only makes the matter worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else youТd have signed your name like an honest man.Т

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really clever thing the King had said that day.

СThat PROVES his guilt,Т said the Queen.

СIt proves nothing of the sort!Т said Alice. СWhy, you donТt even know what theyТre about!Т

СRead them,Т said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. СWhere shall I begin, please your Majesty?Т he asked.

СBegin at the beginning,Т the King said gravely, Сand go on till you come to the end: then stop.Т

These were the verses the White Rabbit read: Ц

		SheТs all my fancy painted him[46 - SheТs all my fancy painted him Ц пароди€ наве€на стихотворением ”иль€ма ћи ЂЁлис √рейї.]
		(I make no idle boast);
		If he or you had lost a limb,
		Which would have suffered most?

		They told me you had been to her,
		And mentioned me to him:
		She gave me a good character,
		But said I could not swim.

		He sent them word I had not gone
		(We know it to be true):
		If she should push the matter on,
		What would become of you?

		I gave her one, they gave him two,
		You gave us three or more;
		They all returned from him to you,
		Though they were mine before.

		If I or she should chance to be
		Involved in this affair,
		He trusts to you to set them free,
		Exactly as we were.

		My notion was that you had been
		(Before she had this fit)
		An obstacle that came between
		Him, and ourselves, and it.

		DonТt let him know she liked them best,
		For this must ever be
		A secret, kept from all the rest,
		Between yourself and me.Т

СThatТs the most important piece of evidence weТve heard yet,Т said the King, rubbing his hands; Сso now let the juryЦТ

СIf any one of them can explain it,Т said Alice, (she had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasnТt a bit afraid of interrupting him,) СIТll give him sixpence. I donТt believe thereТs an atom of meaning in it.Т

The jury all wrote down on their slates, СSHE doesnТt believe thereТs an atom of meaning in it,Т but none of them attempted to explain the paper.

СIf thereТs no meaning in it,Т said the King, Сthat saves a world of trouble, you know, as we neednТt try to find any. And yet I donТt know,Т he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; СI seem to see some meaning in them, after all. УЦSAID I COULD NOT SWIMЦФ you canТt swim, can you?Т he added, turning to the Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. СDo I look like it?Т he said. (Which he certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

СAll right, so far,Т said the King, and he went on muttering over the verses to himself: СУWE KNOW IT TO BE TRUEЦФ thatТs the jury, of course Ц УI GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWOЦФ why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you knowЦТ

СBut, it goes on УTHEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,ФТ said Alice.

СWhy, there they are!Т said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts on the table. СNothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again Ц УBEFORE SHE HAD THIS FITЦФ you never had fits, my dear, I think?Т he said to the Queen.

СNever!Т said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)

СThen the words donТt FIT you,Т said the King, looking round the court with a smile. There was a dead silence.

СItТs a pun!Т the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed, СLet the jury consider their verdict,Т the King said, for about the twentieth time that day.

СNo, no!Т said the Queen. СSentence first Ц verdict afterwards.Т

СStuff and nonsense!Т said Alice loudly. СThe idea of having the sentence first!Т

СHold your tongue!Т said the Queen, turning purple.

СI wonТt!Т said Alice.

СOff with her head!Т the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody moved.

СWho cares for you?Т said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this time.) СYouТre nothing but a pack of cards!Т

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

СWake up, Alice dear!Т said her sister; СWhy, what a long sleep youТve had!Т

СOh, IТve had such a curious dream!Т said Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, СIt WAS a curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; itТs getting late.Т So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream: Ц

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hersЦshe could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that WOULD always get into her eyes Ц and still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive the strange creatures of her little sisterТs dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by Ц the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool Ц she could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends shared their neverending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution Ц once more the pigbaby was sneezing on the DuchessТs knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it Ц once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the LizardТs slatepencil, and the choking of the suppressed guineapigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull reality Ц the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds Ц the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheepbells, and the QueenТs shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boy Ц and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all thy other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farmyard Ц while the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock TurtleТs heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the aftertime, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own childlife, and the happy summer days.




Through The Looking-Glass




White Pawn (Alice) to play, and win in eleven moves









DRAMATIC PERSON&#198; (as arranged before commencement of game)








		Child of the pure unclouded brow
		And dreaming eyes of wonder!
		Though time be fleet, and I and thou
		Are half a life asunder,
		Thy loving smile will surely hail
		The lovegift of a fairytale.
		I have not seen thy sunny face,
		Nor heard thy silver laughter:
		No thought of me shall find a place
		In thy young lifeТs hereafter Ц
		Enough that now thou wilt not fail
		To listen to my fairytale.
		A tale begun in other days,
		When summer suns were glowing Ц
		A simple chime, that served to time
		The rhythm of our rowing Ц
		Whose echoes live in memory yet,
		Though envious years would say Сforget.Т
		Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread,
		With bitter tidings laden,
		Shall summon to unwelcome bed
		A melancholy maiden!
		We are but older children, dear,
		Who fret to find our bedtime near.
		Without, the frost, the blinding snow,
		The stormwindТs moody madness Ц
		Within, the firelightТs ruddy glow,
		And childhoodТs nest of gladness.
		The magic words shall hold thee fast:
		Thou shalt not heed the raving blast.
		And, though the shadow of a sigh
		May tremble through the story,
		For Сhappy summer daysТ gone by,
		And vanishТd summer glory Ц
		It shall not touch, with breath of bale,
		The pleasance of our fairytale.




Chapter I

Looking-Glass House


One thing was certain, that the white kitten had had nothing to do with it Ц it was the black kittenТs fault entirely. For the white kitten had been having its face washed by the old cat for the last quarter of an hour (and bearing it pretty well, considering): so you see that it couldnТt have had any hand in the mischief.

The way Dinah washed her childrenТs faces was this: first she held the poor thing down by its ear with one paw, and then with the other paw she rubbed its face all over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: and just now, as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, which was lying quite still and trying to purr Ц no doubt feeling that it was all meant for its good.

But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in the afternoon, and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in a corner of the great armchair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the kitten had been having a grand game of romps with the ball of worsted Alice had been trying to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had all come undone again; and there it was, spread over the hearthrug, all knots and tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail in the middle.

СOh, you wicked little thing!Т cried Alice, catching up the kitten, and giving it a little kiss to make it understand that it was in disgrace. СReally, Dinah ought to have taught you better manners! You ought, Dinah, you know you ought!Т she added, looking reproachfully at the old cat, and speaking in as cross a voice as she could manage Ц and then she scrambled back into the armchair, taking the kitten and the worsted with her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didnТt get on very fast, as she was talking all the time, sometimes to the kitten, and sometimes to herself. Kitty sat very demurely on her knee, pretending to watch the progress of the winding, and now and then putting out one paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would be glad to help, if it might.

СDo you know what tomorrow is, Kitty?Т[47 - —ледующий день Ц это 5 но€бр€, то есть день √а€ ‘окса. √ай ‘окс был участником порохового заговора Ц неудавшейс€ попытки взорвать здание ѕарламента вместе с королем. 5 но€бр€ 1605 г. заговор был раскрыт.  аждый год этот день отмечают кострами и фейерверками.] Alice began. СYouТd have guessed if youТd been up in the window with me Ц only Dinah was making you tidy, so you couldnТt. I was watching the boys getting in sticks for the bonfire Ц and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got so cold, and it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, weТll go and see the bonfire tomorrow.Т Here Alice wound two or three turns of the worsted round the kittenТs neck, just to see how it would look: this led to a scramble, in which the ball rolled down upon the floor, and yards and yards of it got unwound again.

СDo you know, I was so angry, Kitty,Т Alice went on, as soon as they were comfortably settled again, Сwhen I saw all the mischief you had been doing, I was very nearly opening the window, and putting you out into the snow! And youТd have deserved it, you little mischievous darling! What have you got to say for yourself? Now donТt interrupt me!Т she went on, holding up one finger. СIТm going to tell you all your faults. Number one: you squeaked twice while Dinah was washing your face this morning. Now you canТt deny it, Kitty: I heard you! What that you say?Т (pretending that the kitten was speaking.) СHer paw went into your eye? Well, thatТs your fault, for keeping your eyes open Ц if youТd shut them tight up, it wouldnТt have happened. Now donТt make any more excuses, but listen! Number two: you pulled Snowdrop away by the tail just as I had put down the saucer of milk before her! What, you were thirsty, were you? How do you know she wasnТt thirsty too? Now for number three: you unwound every bit of the worsted while I wasnТt looking!

СThatТs three faults, Kitty, and youТve not been punished for any of them yet. You know IТm saving up all your punishments for Wednesday week[48 - For Wednesday week Ц букв. до среды через среду; зд.: после дождичка в четверг (в день, который никогда не наступит).] Ц Suppose they had saved up all my punishments?Т she went on, talking more to herself than the kitten. СWhat would they do at the end of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, when the day came. Or Ц let me see Ц suppose each punishment was to be going without a dinner: then, when the miserable day came, I should have to go without fifty dinners at once! Well, I shouldnТt mind that much! IТd far rather go without them than eat them!

СDo you hear the snow against the windowpanes, Kitty? How nice and soft it sounds! Just as if some one was kissing the window all over outside. I wonder if the snow loves the trees and fields, that it kisses them so gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, with a white quilt; and perhaps it says, УGo to sleep, darlings, till the summer comes again.Ф And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty, they dress themselves all in green, and dance about Ц whenever the wind blows Ц oh, thatТs very pretty!Т cried Alice, dropping the ball of worsted to clap her hands. СAnd I do so wish it was true! IТm sure the woods look sleepy in the autumn, when the leaves are getting brown.

СKitty, can you play chess? Now, donТt smile, my dear, IТm asking it seriously. Because, when we were playing just now, you watched just as if you understood it: and when I said УCheck!Ф you purred! Well, it was a nice check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadnТt been for that nasty Knight, that came wiggling down among my pieces. Kitty, dear, letТs pretend Ц СAnd here I wish I could tell you half the things Alice used to say, beginning with her favourite phrase СLetТs pretend.Т She had had quite a long argument with her sister only the day before Ц all because Alice had begun with СLetТs pretend weТre kings and queens;Т and her sister, who liked being very exact, had argued that they couldnТt, because there were only two of them, and Alice had been reduced at last to say, СWell, you can be one of them then, and IТll be all the rest.Т And once she had really frightened her old nurse by shouting suddenly in her ear, СNurse! Do letТs pretend that IТm a hungry hy&#230;na, and youТre a bone.Т

But this is taking us away from AliceТs speech to the kitten. СLetТs pretend that youТre the Red Queen, Kitty! Do you know, I think if you sat up and folded your arms, youТd look exactly like her. Now do try, thereТs a dear!Т And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set it up before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, the thing didnТt succeed, principally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldnТt fold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held it up to the Lookingglass, that it might see how sulky it was СЦand if youТre not good directly,Т she added, СIТll put you through into Lookingglass House. How would you like that?

СNow, if youТll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so much, IТll tell you all my ideas about Lookingglass House. First, thereТs the room you can see through the glass Ц thatТs just the same as our drawingroom, only the things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon a chair Ц all but the bit behind the fireplace. Oh! I do so wish I could see that bit! I want so much to know whether theyТve a fire in the winter: you never can tell, you know, unless our fire smokes, and then smoke comes up in that room too Ц but that may be only pretence, just to make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books are something like our books, only the words go the wrong way: I know that, because IТve held up one of our books to the glass, and then they hold up one in the other room.

СHow would you like to live in Lookingglass House, Kitty? I wonder if theyТd give you milk in there? Perhaps Lookingglass milk isnТt good to drink Ц but oh, Kitty! now we come to the passage. You can just see a little peep of the passage in Lookingglass House, if you leave the door of our drawingroom wide open: and itТs very like our passage as far as you can see, only you know it may be quite different on beyond. Oh, Kitty, how nice it would be if we could only get through into Lookingglass House! IТm sure itТs got, oh! such beautiful things in it! LetТs pretend thereТs a way of getting through into it, somehow, Kitty. LetТs pretend the glass has got all soft like gauze, so that we can get through. Why, itТs turning into a sort of mist now, I declare! ItТll be easy enough to get throughЦТ She was up on the chimneypiece while she said this, though she hardly knew how she had got there. And certainly the glass was beginning to melt away, just like a bright silvery mist.

In another moment Alice was through the glass, and had jumped lightly down into the Lookingglass room. The very first thing she did was to look whether there was a fire in the fireplace, and she was quite pleased to find that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly as the one she had left behind. СSo I shall be as warm here as I was in the old room,Т thought Alice: Сwarmer, in fact, because thereТll be no one here to scold me away from the fire.[49 - ¬ викторианской Ѕритании огонь в спальн€х разводили только когда было действительно холодно. ¬ прохладную погоду самым теплым местом в доме была гостина€, в которой горел камин. ќднако считалось, что дет€м там делать нечего: им следовало проводить врем€ в детской, классной комнате и в саду.] Oh, what fun itТll be, when they see me through the glass in here, and canТt get at me!Т

Then she began looking about, and noticed that what could be seen from the old room was quite common and uninteresting, but that all the rest was as different as possible. For instance, the pictures on the wall next the fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on the chimneypiece (you know you can only see the back of it in the Lookingglass) had got the face of a little old man, and grinned at her.

СThey donТt keep this room so tidy as the other,Т Alice thought to herself, as she noticed several of the chessmen down in the hearth among the cinders; but in another moment, with a little СOh!Т of surprise, she was down on her hands and knees watching them. The chessmen were walking about, two and two!

СHere are the Red King and the Red Queen,Т Alice said (in a whisper, for fear of frightening them), Сand there are the White King and the White Queen sitting on the edge of the shovel Ц and here are two Castles walking arm in arm Ц I donТt think they can hear me,Т she went on, as she put her head closer down, Сand IТm nearly sure they canТt see me. I feel somehow as if I were invisibleЦТ

Here something began squeaking on the table behind Alice, and made her turn her head just in time to see one of the White Pawns roll over and begin kicking: she watched it with great curiosity to see what would happen next.

СIt is the voice of my child!Т the White Queen cried out, as she rushed past the King, so violently that she knocked him over among the cinders. СMy precious Lily! My imperial kitten!Т and she began scrambling wildly up the side of the fender.

СImperial fiddlestick!Т said the King, rubbing his nose, which had been hurt by the fall. He had a right to be a little annoyed with the Queen, for he was covered with ashes from head to foot.

Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor little Lily was nearly screaming herself into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queen and set her on the table by the side of her noisy little daughter.

The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey through the air had quite taken away her breath and for a minute or two she could do nothing but hug the little Lily in silence. As soon as she had recovered her breath a little, she called out to the White King, who was sitting sulkily among the ashes, СMind the volcano!Т

СWhat volcano?Т said the King, looking up anxiously into the fire, as if he thought that was the most likely place to find one.

СBlew Ц me Ц up,Т panted the Queen, who was still a little out of breath. СMind you come up Ц the regular way Ц donТt get blown up!Т

Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled up from bar to bar, till at last she said, СWhy, youТll be hours and hours getting to the table, at that rate. IТd far better help you, hadnТt I?Т But the King took no notice of the question: it was quite clear that he could neither hear her nor see her.

So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him across more slowly than she had lifted the Queen, that she mightnТt take his breath away; but, before she put him on the table, she thought she might as well dust him a little, he was so covered with ashes.

She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her life such a face as the King made, when he found himself held in the air by an invisible hand, and being dusted: he was far too much astonished to cry out, but his eyes and his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounder and rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that she nearly let him drop upon the floor.

СOh! please donТt make such faces, my dear!Т she cried out, quite forgetting that the King couldnТt hear her. СYou make me laugh so that I can hardly hold you! And donТt keep your mouth so wide open! All the ashes will get into it Ц there, now I think youТre tidy enough!Т she added, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the table near the Queen.

The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay perfectly still; and Alice was a little alarmed at what she had done, and went round the room to see if she could find any water to throw over him. However, she could find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back with it she found he had recovered, and he and the Queen were talking together in a frightened whisper Ц so low, that Alice could hardly hear what they said.

The King was saying СI assure, you my dear, I turned cold to the very ends of my whiskers!Т

To which the Queen replied СYou havenТt got any whiskers.Т

СThe horror of that moment,Т the King went on, СI shall never, never forget!Т

СYou will, though,Т the Queen said, Сif you donТt make a memorandum of it.Т

Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormous memorandumbook out of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden thought struck her, and she took hold of the end of the pencil, which came some way over his shoulder, and began writing for him.

The poor King look puzzled and unhappy, and struggled with the pencil for some time without saying anything; but Alice was too strong for him, and at last he panted out, СMy dear! I really must get a thinner pencil. I canТt manage this one a bit: it writes all manner of things that I donТt intendЦТ

СWhat manner of things?Т said the Queen, looking over the book (in which Alice had put СThe White Knight is sliding down the poker. He balances very badlyТ[50 - Ѕелый рыцарь снова по€витс€ в √лаве 8. “ам читатель получит объ€снение его плохому равновесию.]) СThatТs not a memorandum of your feelings!Т

There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and while she sat watching the White King (for she was still a little anxious about him, and had the ink all ready to throw over him, in case he fainted again), she turned over the leaves, to find some part that she could read, С Ц for itТs all in some language I donТt know,Т she said to herself.

It was like this.



YKCOWREBBAJ


		sevot yhtils eht dna ,gillirb sawTТ
		:ebaw eht ni elbmig dna eryg diD
		,sevogorob eht erew ysmim llA
		.ebargtuo shtar emom eht dnA

She puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright thought struck her. СWhy, itТs a Lookingglass book, of course! And if I hold it up to a glass, the words will all go the right way again.Т

This was the poem that Alice read.



`JABBERWOCKY[51 - ¬ качестве источников вдохновени€ дл€ написани€ этого сочинени€ называют несколько стихотворений. ¬ любом случае это одно из лучших стихотворений литературы нонсенса. ќно так полюбилось читател€м, что Ћьюис  эрролл не раз упом€нул о нем в своей знаменитой поэме Ђќхота на —наркаї.]


		ТTwas brillig, and the slithy toves[52 - Ќекоторые слова из этого стихотворени€ объ€сн€ютс€ в √лаве 6. ќни складываютс€ из нескольких слов, так что о значении можно догадатьс€ по звучанию и написанию.]
		Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
		All mimsy were the borogoves,
		And the mome raths outgrabe.

		СBeware the Jabberwock, my son!
		The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
		Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
		The frumious Bandersnatch!Т

		He took his vorpal sword in hand:
		Long time the manxome foe he sought Ц
		So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
		And stood awhile in thought.

		And as in uffish thought he stood,
		The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
		Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
		And burbled as it came!

		One, two! One, two! And through and through
		The vorpal blade went snickersnack!
		He left it dead, and with its head
		He went galumphing back.

		СAnd, hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
		Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
		O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!Т
		He chortled in his joy.

		СTwas brillig, and the slithy toves
		Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
		All mimsy were the borogoves,
		And the mome raths outgrabe.

СIt seems very pretty,Т she said when she had finished it, Сbut itТs rather hard to understand!Т (You see she didnТt like to confess, even to herself, that she couldnТt make it out at all.) СSomehow it seems to fill my head with ideas Ц only I donТt exactly know what they are! However, somebody killed something: thatТs clear, at any rate ЦТ

СBut oh!Т thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, Сif I donТt make haste I shall have to go back through the Lookingglass, before IТve seen what the rest of the house is like! LetТs have a look at the garden first!Т She was out of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs Ц or, at least, it wasnТt exactly running, but a new invention of hers for getting down stairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just kept the tips of her fingers on the handrail, and floated gently down without even touching the stairs with her feet: then she floated on through the hall, and would have gone straight out at the door in the same way, if she hadnТt caught hold of the doorpost. She was getting a little giddy with so much floating in the air, and was rather glad to find herself walking again in the natural way.




Chapter II

The Garden of Live Flowers


СI should see the garden far better,Т said Alice to herself, Сif I could get to the top of that hill: and hereТs a path that leads straight to it Ц at least, no, it doesnТt do that ЦТ (after going a few yards along the path, and turning several sharp corners), Сbut I suppose it will at last. But how curiously it twists! ItТs more like a corkscrew than a path! Well, this turn goes to the hill, I suppose Ц no, it doesnТt! This goes straight back to the house! Well then, IТll try it the other way.Т

And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying turn after turn, but always coming back to the house, do what she would. Indeed, once, when she turned a corner rather more quickly than usual, she ran against it before she could stop herself.

СItТs no use talking about it,Т Alice said, looking up at the house and pretending it was arguing with her. СIТm not going in again yet. I know I should have to get through the Lookingglass again Ц back into the old room Ц and thereТd be an end of all my adventures!Т

So, resolutely turning back upon the house, she set out once more down the path, determined to keep straight on till she got to the hill. For a few minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, СI really shall do it this timeЦТ when the path gave a sudden twist and shook itself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she found herself actually walking in at the door.

СOh, itТs too bad!Т she cried. СI never saw such a house for getting in the way! Never!Т

However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to be done but start again. This time she came upon a large flowerbed, with a border of daisies, and a willowtree growing in the middle.

СO Tigerlily,Т said Alice, addressing herself to one that was waving gracefully about in the wind, СI wish you could talk!Т

СWe can talk,Т said the Tigerlily, Сwhen thereТs anybody worth talking to.Т

Alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quite seemed to take her breath away. At length, as the Tigerlily only went on waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice Ц almost in a whisper. СAnd can all the flowers talk?Т

СAs well as you can,Т said the Tigerlily. СAnd a great deal louder.Т

СIt isnТt manners for us to begin, you know,Т said the Rose[53 - „асто утверждают, что под розой подразумеваетс€ младша€ сестра јлисы –ода.], Сand I really was wondering when youТd speak! Said I to myself, УHer face has got some sense in it, thought itТs not a clever one!Ф Still, youТre the right colour, and that goes a long way.Т

СI donТt care about the colour,Т the Tigerlily remarked. СIf only her petals curled up a little more, sheТd be all right.Т

Alice didnТt like being criticized, so she began asking questions. СArenТt you sometimes frightened at being planted out here, with nobody to take care of you?Т

СThereТs the tree in the middle,Т said the Rose. СWhat else is it good for?Т

СBut what could it do, if any danger came?Т Alice asked.

СIt says УBoughwough!Ф cried a Daisy. СThatТs why its branches are called boughs!Т

СDidnТt you know that?Т cried another Daisy, and here they all began shouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrill voices. СSilence, every one of you!Т cried the Tigerlily, waving itself passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement. СThey know I canТt get at them!Т it panted, bending its quivering head towards Alice, Сor they wouldnТt dare to do it!Т

СNever mind!Т Alice said in a soothing tone, and, stooping down to the daisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered СIf you donТt hold your tongues, IТll pick you!Т

There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turned white.

СThatТs right!Т said the Tigerlily. СThe daisies are worst of all. When one speaks, they all begin together, and itТs enough to make one wither to hear the way they go on!Т

СHow is it you can all talk so nicely?Т Alice said, hoping to get it into a better temper by a compliment. СIТve been in many gardens before, but none of the flowers could talk.Т

СPut your hand down, and feel the ground,Т said the Tigerlily. СThen youТll know why.Т

Alice did so. СItТs very hard,Т she said; Сbut I donТt see what that has to do with it.Т

СIn most gardens,Т the Tigerlily said, Сthey make the beds too soft Ц so that the flowers are always asleep.Т

This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite pleased to know it. СI never thought of that before!Т she said.

СItТs my opinion that you never think at all,Т the Rose said, in a rather severe tone.

СI never saw anybody that looked stupider,Т a Violet[54 - »м€ ¬айолет носила сама€ младша€ сестра јлисы.] said, so suddenly, that Alice quite jumped; for it hadnТt spoken before.

СHold your tongue!Т cried the Tigerlily. СAs if you ever saw anybody! You keep your head under the leaves, and snore away there, till you know no more whatТs going on in the world, than if you were a bud!Т

СAre there any more people in the garden besides me?Т Alice said, not choosing to notice the RoseТs last remark.

СThereТs one other flower in the garden that can move about like you,Т said the Rose. СI wonder how you do itЦТ (СYouТre always wondering,Т said the Tigerlily), Сbut sheТs more bushy than you are.Т

СIs she like me?Т Alice asked eagerly, for the thought crossed her mind, СThereТs another little girl in the garden, somewhere!Т

СWell, she has the same awkward shape as you,Т the Rose said: Сbut sheТs redder Ц and her petals are shorter, I think.Т

СHer petals are done up close, almost like a dahlia,Т the Tigerlily interrupted: Сnot tumbled about anyhow, like yours.Т

СBut thatТs not your fault,Т the Rose added kindly. СYouТre beginning to fade, you know Ц and then one canТt help oneТs petals getting a little untidy.Т

Alice didnТt like this idea at all: so, to change the subject, she asked СDoes she ever come out here?Т

СI daresay youТll see her soon,Т said the Rose. СSheТs one of the kind that has nine spikes, you know.Т

СWhere does she wear them?Т Alice asked with some curiosity.

СWhy, all round her head, of course,Т the Rose replied. СI was wondering you hadnТt got some too. I thought it was the regular rule.Т

СSheТs coming!Т cried the Larkspur. СI hear her footstep, thump, thump, along the gravelwalk!Т

Alice looked round eagerly and found that it was the Red Queen. СSheТs grown a good deal!Т was her first remark. She had indeed: when Alice first found her in the ashes, she had been only three inches high Ц and here she was, half a head taller than Alice herself!

СItТs the fresh air that does it,Т said the Rose: Сwonderfully fine air it is, out here.Т

СI think IТll go and meet her,Т said Alice, for, though the flowers were interesting enough, she felt that it would be far grander to have a talk with a real Queen.

СYou canТt possibly do that,Т said the Rose: СI should advise you to walk the other way.Т

This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, but set off at once towards the Red Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her in a moment, and found herself walking in at the frontdoor again.

A little provoked, she drew back, and, after looking everywhere for the Queen (whom she spied out at last, a long way off), she thought she would try the plan, this time, of walking in the opposite direction.

It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a minute before she found herself face to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of the hill she had been so long aiming at.

СWhere do you come from?Т said the Red Queen. СAnd where are you going? Look up, speak nicely, and donТt twiddle your fingers all the time.Т

Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as well as she could, that she had lost her way.

СI donТt know what you mean by your way,Т said the Queen: Сall the ways about here belong to me Ц but why did you come out here at all?Т she added in a kinder tone. СCurtsey while youТre thinking what to say. It saves time.Т[55 - ¬ ¬икторианскую эпоху даже дет€м полагалось говорить вежливо и разумно. ƒела€ книксен, можно было быстро обдумать ответ и подобрать нужные слова.]

Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in awe of the Queen to disbelieve it. СIТll try it when I go home,Т she thought to herself, Сthe next time IТm a little late for dinner.Т

СItТs time for you to answer now,Т the Queen said, looking at her watch: Сopen your mouth a little wider when you speak, and always say Уyour Majesty.ФТ

СI only wanted to see what the garden was like, your Majesty ЦТ

СThatТs right,Т said the Queen, patting her on the head, which Alice didnТt like at all: Сthough, when you say УgardenФ Ц IТve seen gardens, compare with which this would be a wilderness.Т

Alice didnТt dare to argue the point, but went on: С Ц and I thought IТd try and find my way to the top of that hill ЦТ

СWhen you say Уhill,ФТ the Queen interrupted, СI could show you hills, in comparison with which youТd call that a valley.Т

СNo, I shouldnТt,Т said Alice, surprised into contradicting her at last: Сa hill canТt be a valley, you know. That would be nonsense ЦТ

The Red Queen shook her head, СYou may call it УnonsenseФ if you like,Т she said, С but IТve heard nonsense, compared with which that would be as sensible as a dictionary!Т

Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the QueenТs tone that she was a little offended: and they walked on in silence till they got to the top of the little hill.

For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, looking out in all directions over the country Ц and a most curious country it was. There were a number of tiny little brooks running straight across it from side to side, and the ground between was divided up into squares by a number of little green hedges, that reached from brook to brook.

СI declare itТs marked out just like a large chessboard!Т Alice said at last. СThere ought to be some men moving about somewhere Ц and so there are!Т She added in a tone of delight, and her heart began to beat quick with excitement as she went on. СItТs a great huge game of chess thatТs being played Ц all over the world Ц if this is the world at all, you know. Oh, what fun it is! How I wish I was one of them! I wouldnТt mind being a Pawn, if only I might join Ц though of course I should like to be a Queen, best.Т

She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said this, but her companion only smiled pleasantly, and said, СThatТs easily managed. You can be the White QueenТs Pawn, if you like, as LilyТs too young to play; and youТre in the Second Square to began with: when you get to the Eighth Square youТll be a Queen ЦТ Just at this moment, somehow or other, they began to run.

Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, how it was that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running hand in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do to keep up with her: and still the Queen kept crying СFaster! Faster!Т, but Alice felt she could not go faster, though she had not breath left to say so.

The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the other things round them never changed their places at all: however fast they went, they never seemed to pass anything. СI wonder if all the things move along with us?Т thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen seemed to guess her thoughts, for she cried, СFaster! DonТt try to talk!Т

Not that Alice had any idea of doing that. She felt as if she would never be able to talk again, she was getting so much out of breath: and still the Queen cried СFaster! Faster!Т, and dragged her along. СAre we nearly there?Т Alice managed to pant out at last.

СNearly there!Т the Queen repeated. СWhy, we passed it ten minutes ago! Faster!Т And they ran on for a time in silence, with the wind whistling in AliceТs ears, and almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied.

СNow! Now!Т cried the Queen. СFaster! Faster!Т And they went so fast that at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching the ground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite exhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground, breathless and giddy.

The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, СYou may rest a little, now.Т

Alice looked round her in great surprise. СWhy, I do believe weТve been under this tree the whole time! EverythingТs just as it was!Т

СOf course it is,Т said the Queen. СWhat would you have it?Т

СWell, in our country,Т said Alice, still panting a little, СyouТd generally get to somewhere else Ц if you ran very fast for a long time, as weТve been doing.Т

СA slow sort of country!Т said the Queen. СNow, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!Т

СIТd rather not try, please!Т said Alice. СIТm quite content to stay here Ц only I am so hot and thirsty!Т

СI know what youТd like!Т the Queen said goodnaturedly, taking a little box out of her pocket. СHave a biscuit?Т

Alice thought it would not be civil to say СNo,Т though it wasnТt at all what she wanted. So she took it, and ate it as well as she could: and it was very dry: and she thought she had never been so nearly choked in all her life.

СWhile youТre refreshing yourself,Т said the Queen, СIТll just take the measurements.Т And she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked in inches, and began measuring the ground, and sticking little pegs in here and there.

СAt the end of two yards,Т she said, putting in a peg to mark the distance, СI shall give you your directions Ц have another biscuit?Т

СNo, thank you,Т said Alice: СoneТs quite enough!Т

СThirst quenched, I hope?Т said the Queen.

Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the Queen did not wait for an answer, but went on. СAt the end of three yards I shall repeat them Ц for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of four, I shall say goodbye. And at the end of five, I shall go!Т

She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice looked on with great interest as she returned to the tree, and then began slowly walking down the row.

At the twoyard peg she faced round, and said СA pawn goes two squares in its first move, you know. So youТll go very quickly through the Third Square Ц by railway, I should think Ц and youТll find yourself in the Fourth Square in no time. Well, that square belongs to Tweedledum and Tweedledee Ц the Fifth is mostly water Ц the Sixth belongs to Humpty Dumpty Ц But you make no remark?Т

СI Ц I didnТt know I had to make one Ц just then,Т Alice faltered out.

СYou should have said,Т the Queen went on in a tone of great reproof, СУItТs extremely kind of you to tell me all thisФ Ц however, weТll suppose it said Ц the Seventh Square is all forest Ц however, one of the Knights will show you the way Ц and in the Eighth Square we shall be Queens together, and itТs all feasting and fun!Т Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat down again.

At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time she said СSpeak in French when you canТt think of the English for a thing Ц turn out your toes as you walk Ц and remember who you are!Т She did not wait for Alice to curtsey, this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, where she turned for a moment to say СGoodbye,Т and then hurried on to the last.

How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she came to the last peg, she was gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or whether she ran quickly into the wood (Сand she can run very fast!Т thought Alice), there was no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice began to remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be time for her to move.




Chapter III

Looking-Glass Insects


Of course the first thing to do was to make a grand survey of the country she was going to travel through. СItТs something very like learning geography,Т thought Alice, as she stood on tiptoe in hopes of being able to see a little further. СPrincipal rivers Ц there are none. Principal mountains Ц IТm on the only one, but I donТt think itТs got any name. Principal towns Ц why, what are those creatures, making honey down there? They canТt be bees Ц nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you know ЦТ and for some time she stood silent, watching one of them that was bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis[56 - Proboscis Ц хобот (у насекомых и также слоновий хобот).] into them, Сjust as if it was a regular bee,Т thought Alice.

However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact, it was an elephant Ц as Alice soon found out, though the idea quite took her breath away at first. СAnd what enormous flowers they must be!Т was her next idea. СSomething like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks put to them Ц and what quantities of honey they must make! I think IТll go down and Ц no, I wonТt just yet,Т she went on, checking herself just as she was beginning to run down the hill, and trying to find some excuse for turning shy so suddenly. СItТll never do to go down among them without a good long branch to brush them away Ц and what fun itТll be when they ask me how I liked my walk. I shall say УOh, I like it well enough ЦФ (here came the favourite little toss of the head), СУonly it was so dusty and hot, and the elephants did tease so!Ф

СI think IТll go down the other way,Т she said after a pause; Сand perhaps I may visit the elephants later on. Besides, I do so want to get into the Third Square!Т

So, with this excuse, she ran down the hill and jumped over the first of the six little brooks.


* * *

СTickets, please!Т said the Guard, putting his head in at the window. In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket: they were about the same size as the people, and quite seemed to fill the carriage.

СNow then! Show your ticket, child!Т the Guard went on, looking angrily at Alice. And a great many voices all said together (Сlike the chorus of a song,Т thought Alice), СDonТt keep him waiting, child! Why, his time is worth a thousand pounds a minute!Т

СIТm afraid I havenТt got one,Т Alice said in a frightened tone: Сthere wasnТt a ticketoffice where I came from.Т And again the chorus of voices went on. СThere wasnТt room for one where she came from. The land there is worth a thousand pounds an inch!Т

СDonТt make excuses,Т said the Guard: Сyou should have bought one from the enginedriver.Т And once more the chorus of voices went on with СThe man that drives the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth a thousand pounds a puff!Т

Alice thought to herself, СThen thereТs no use in speaking.Т The voices didnТt join in this time, as she hadnТt spoken, but, to her great surprise, they all thought in chorus (I hope you understand what thinking in chorus means Ц for I must confess that I donТt), СBetter say nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a word!Т

СI shall dream about a thousand pounds tonight, I know I shall!Т thought Alice.

All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope, then through a microscope, and then through an operaglass[57 - Operaglass(es) Ц театральный бинокль.]. At last he said, СYouТre travelling the wrong way,Т and shut up the window, and went away.

СSo young a child,Т said the gentleman sitting opposite to her, (he was dressed in white paper), Сought to know which way sheТs going, even if she doesnТt know her own name!Т

A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, shut his eyes and said in a loud voice, СShe ought to know her way to the ticketoffice, even if she doesnТt know her alphabet!Т

There was a Beetle sitting next to the Goat (it was a very queer carriagefull of passengers altogether), and, as the rule seemed to be that they should all speak in turn, he went on with СSheТll have to go back from here as luggage!Т

Alice couldnТt see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, but a hoarse voice spoke next. СChange enginesТ Ц it said, and there it choked and was obliged to leave off.

СIt sounds like a horse,Т Alice thought to herself. And an extremely small voice, close to her ear, said СYou might make a joke on that Ц something about УhorseФ and Уhoarse,Ф you know.Т

Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, СShe must be labelled УLass, with care,Ф you knowЦТ

And after that other voices went on (СWhat a number of people there are in the carriage!Т thought Alice), saying СShe must go by post, as sheТs got a head on her ЦТ СShe must be sent as a message by the telegraph ЦТ СShe must draw the train herself the rest of the way Ц,Т and so on.

But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned forwards and whispered in her ear, СNever mind what they all say, my dear, but take a returnticket every time the train stops.Т

СIndeed I shanТt!Т Alice said rather impatiently. СI donТt belong to this railway journey at all Ц I was in a wood just now Ц and I wish I could get back there.Т

СYou might make a joke on that,Т said the little voice close to her ear: Сsomething about Уyou would if you could,Ф you know.Т

СDonТt tease so,Т said Alice, looking about in vain to see where the voice came from. СIf youТre so anxious to have a joke made, why donТt you make one yourself?Т

The little voice sighed deeply. It was very unhappy, evidently, and Alice would have said something pitying to comfort it, Сif it would only sigh like other people!Т she thought. But this was such a wonderfully small sigh, that she wouldnТt have heard it at all, if it hadnТt come quite close to her ear. The consequence of this was that it tickled her ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts from the unhappiness of the poor little creature.

СI know you are a friend,Т the little voice went on: Сa dear friend, and an old friend. And you wonТt hurt me, though I am an insect.Т

СWhat kind of insect?Т Alice inquired, a little anxiously. What she really wanted to know was, whether it could sting or not, but she thought this wouldnТt be quite a civil question to ask.

СWhat, then you donТtЦТ the little voice began, when it was drowned by a shrill scream from the engine, and everybody jumped up in alarm, Alice among the rest.

The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, quietly drew it in and said СItТs only a brook we have to jump over.Т Everybody seemed satisfied with this, though Alice felt a little nervous at the idea of trains jumping at all. СHowever, itТll take us into the Fourth Square, thatТs some comfort!Т she said to herself. In another moment she felt the carriage rise straight up into the air, and in her fright she caught at the thing nearest to her hand, which happened to be the GoatТs beard.


* * *

But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, and she found herself sitting quietly under a tree Ц while the Gnat[58 - Gnat Ц разновидность комара.] (for that was the insect she had been talking to) was balancing itself on a twig just over her head, and fanning her with its wings.

It certainly was a very large Gnat: Сabout the size of a chicken,Т Alice thought. Still, she couldnТt feel nervous with it, after they had been talking together so long.

С Ц then you donТt like all insects?Т the Gnat went on, as quietly as if nothing had happened.

СI like them when they can talk,Т Alice said. СNone of them ever talk, where I come from.Т

СWhat sort of insects do you rejoice in, where you come from?Т the Gnat inquired.

СI donТt rejoice in insects at all,Т Alice explained, Сbecause IТm rather afraid of them Ц at least the large kinds. But I can tell you the names of some of them.Т

СOf course they answer to their names?Т the Gnat remarked carelessly.

СI never knew them do it.Т

СWhatТs the use of their having names,Т the Gnat said, Сif they wonТt answer to them?Т

СNo use to them,Т said Alice; Сbut itТs useful to the people who name them, I suppose. If not, why do things have names at all?Т

СI canТt say,Т the Gnat replied. СFurther on, in the wood down there, theyТve got no names Ц however, go on with your list of insects: youТre wasting time.Т

СWell, thereТs the Horsefly,Т Alice began, counting off the names on her fingers.

СAll right,Т said the Gnat: Сhalf way up that bush, youТll see a Rockinghorsefly, if you look. ItТs made entirely of wood, and gets about by swinging itself from branch to branch.Т

СWhat does it live on?Т Alice asked, with great curiosity.

СSap and sawdust,Т said the Gnat. СGo on with the list.Т

Alice looked up at the Rockinghorsefly with great interest, and made up her mind that it must have been just repainted, it looked so bright and sticky; and then she went on.

СAnd thereТs the Dragonfly.Т

СLook on the branch above your head,Т said the Gnat, Сand there youТll find a Snapdragonfly[59 - Snapdragonfly Ц игра слов строитс€ на названии попул€рной рождественской игры snapdragon (львиный зев). »зюм спрыскивалс€ бренди и поджигалс€, а участники должны были выхватывать с блюда изюминки и есть их.]. Its body is made of plumpudding, its wings of hollyleaves, and its head is a raisin burning in brandy.Т

СAnd what does it live on?Т Alice asked, as before.

СFrumenty and mincepie,[60 - Frumenty and mincepie Ц и то и другое Ц традиционные рождественские блюда. Frumenty Ц это разновидность пудинга из пшеницы, молока, €иц и бульона с сахаром и специ€ми. Mincepies Ц это пирожки со сладкой начинкой из сухофруктов, нутр€ного сала, бренди и специй (мускатного ореха, корицы, гвоздики и т.д.)]Т the Gnat replied; Сand it makes its nest in a Christmasbox.Т

СAnd then thereТs the Butterfly,Т Alice went on, after she had taken a good look at the insect with its head on fire, and had thought to herself, СI wonder if thatТs the reason insects are so fond of flying into candles Ц because they want to turn into Snapdragonflies!Т

СCrawling at your feet,Т said the Gnat (Alice drew her feet back in some alarm), Сyou may observe a Breadandbutterfly. Its wings are thin slices of breadandbutter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lump of sugar.Т

СAnd what does it live on?Т

СWeak tea with cream in it.Т

A new difficulty came into AliceТs head. СSupposing it couldnТt find any?Т she suggested.

СThen it would die, of course.Т

СBut that must happen very often,Т Alice remarked thoughtfully.

СIt always happens,Т said the Gnat.

After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two, pondering. The Gnat amused itself meanwhile by humming round and round her head: at last it settled again and remarked, СI suppose you donТt want to lose your name?Т

СNo, indeed,Т Alice said, a little anxiously.

СAnd yet I donТt know,Т the Gnat went on in a careless tone: Сonly think how convenient it would be if you could manage to go home without it! For instance, if the governess wanted to call you to your lessons, she would call out УCome here Ц ,Ф and there she would have to leave off, because there wouldnТt be any name for her to call, and of course you wouldnТt have to go, you know.Т

СThat would never do, IТm sure,Т said Alice: Сthe governess would never think of excusing me lessons for that. If she couldnТt remember my name, sheТd call me УMiss,Ф as the servants do.Т

СWell. if she said УMiss,Ф and didnТt say anything more,Т the Gnat remarked, Сof course youТd miss your lessons. ThatТs a joke. I wish you had made it.Т

СWhy do you wish I had made it?Т Alice asked. СItТs a very bad one.Т

But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two large tears came rolling down its cheeks.

СYou shouldnТt make jokes,Т Alice said, Сif it makes you so unhappy.Т

Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and this time the poor Gnat really seemed to have sighed itself away, for, when Alice looked up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the twig, and, as she was getting quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up and walked on.

She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the other side of it: it looked much darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a little timid about going into it. However, on second thoughts, she made up her mind to go on: Сfor I certainly wonТt go back,Т she thought to herself, and this was the only way to the Eighth Square.

СThis must be the wood, she said thoughtfully to herself, Сwhere things have no names. I wonder whatТll become of my name when I go in? I shouldnТt like to lose it at all Ц because theyТd have to give me another, and it would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then the fun would be, trying to find the creature that had got my old name! ThatТs just like the advertisements, you know, when people lose dogs Ц Уanswers to the name of СDashТ: had on a brass collarФ Ц just fancy calling everything you met УAlice,Ф till one of them answered! Only they wouldnТt answer at all, if they were wise.Т

She was rambling on in this way when she reached the wood: it looked very cool and shady. СWell, at any rate itТs a great comfort,Т she said as she stepped under the trees, Сafter being so hot, to get into the Ц into the Ц into what?Т she went on, rather surprised at not being able to think of the word. СI mean to get under the Ц under the Ц under this, you know!Т putting her hand on the trunk of the tree. СWhat does it call itself, I wonder? I do believe itТs got no name Ц why, to be sure it hasnТt!Т

She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she suddenly began again. СThen it really has happened, after all! And now, who am I? I will remember, if I can! IТm determined to do it!Т But being determined didnТt help much, and all she could say, after a great deal of puzzling, wasТL, I know it begins with L!Т[61 - L, I know it begins with L! Ц јлиса права: ее фамили€ Ћидделл.]

Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at Alice with its large gentle eyes, but didnТt seem at all frightened. СHere then! Here then!Т Alice said, as she held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but it only started back a little, and then stood looking at her again.

СWhat do you call yourself?Т the Fawn said at last. Such a soft sweet voice it had!

СI wish I knew!Т thought poor Alice. She answered, rather sadly, СNothing, just now.Т

СThink again,Т it said: Сthat wonТt do.Т

Alice thought, but nothing came of it. СPlease, would you tell me what you call yourself?Т she said timidly. СI think that might help a little.Т

СIТll tell you, if youТll move a little further on,Т the Fawn said. СI canТt remember here.Т

So they walked on together through the wood, Alice with her arms clasped lovingly round the soft neck of the Fawn, till they came out into another open field, and here the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air, and shook itself free from AliceТs arms. СIТm a Fawn!Т it cried out in a voice of delight, Сand, dear me! youТre a human child!Т A sudden look of alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another moment it had darted away at full speed.

Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with vexation at having lost her dear little fellowtraveler so suddenly. СHowever, I know my name now.Т she said: СthatТs some comfort. Alice Ц Alice Ц I wonТt forget it again. And now, which of these fingerposts ought I to follow, I wonder?Т

It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there was only one road through the wood, and the two fingerposts[62 - Fingerposts Ц у традиционных английских указателей несколько Ђрукї (стрелок) с названи€ми населенных пунктов, которые наход€тс€ в указанном направлении.] both pointed along it. СIТll settle it,Т Alice said to herself, Сwhen the road divides and they point different ways.Т

But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on and on, a long way, but wherever the road divided there were sure to be two fingerposts pointing the same way, one marked СTO TWEEDLEDUMТS HOUSE,Т and the other СTO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE.Т

СI do believe,Т said Alice at last, Сthat they live in the same house! I wonder I never thought of that before Ц But I canТt stay there long. IТll just call and say УHow dТyou do?Ф and ask them the way out of the wood. If I could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!Т So she wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on turning a sharp corner, she came upon two fat little men, so suddenly that she could not help starting back, but in another moment she recovered herself, feeling sure that they must be




Chapter IV

Tweedledum and Tweedledee


They were standing under a tree, each with an arm round the otherТs neck, and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of them had СDUMТ embroidered on his collar, and the other СDEE.Т СI suppose theyТve each got УTWEEDLEФ round at the back of the collar,Т she said to herself.

They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, and she was just looking round to see if the word УTWEEDLEФ was written at the back of each collar, when she was startled by a voice coming from the one marked СDUM.Т

СIf you think weТre waxworks,Т he said, Сyou ought to pay, you know. Waxworks werenТt made to be looked at for nothing. Nohow!Т

СContrariwise,Т added the one marked СDEE,Т Сif you think weТre alive, you ought to speak.Т

СIТm sure IТm very sorry,Т was all Alice could say; for the words of the old song kept ringing through her head like the ticking of a clock, and she could hardly help saying them out loud: Ц

		СTweedledum and Tweedledee[63 - Tweedledum and Tweedledee Ц это попул€рное британское детское стихотворение.]
		Agreed to have a battle;
		For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
		Had spoiled his nice new rattle.
		Just then flew down a monstrous crow,
		As black as a tarbarrel;
		Which frightened both the heroes so,
		They quite forgot their quarrel.Т

СI know what youТre thinking about,Т said Tweedledum: Сbut it isnТt so, nohow.Т

СContrariwise,Т continued Tweedledee, Сif it was so, it might be; and if it were so, it would be; but as it isnТt, it ainТt. ThatТs logic.Т

СI was thinking,Т Alice said very politely, Сwhich is the best way out of this wood: itТs getting so dark. Would you tell me, please?Т

But the little men only looked at each other and grinned.

They looked so exactly like a couple of great schoolboys, that Alice couldnТt help pointing her finger at Tweedledum, and saying СFirst Boy!Т

СNohow!Т Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his mouth up again with a snap.

СNext Boy!Т said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, though she felt quite certain he would only shout out СContrariwise!Т and so he did.

СYouТve been wrong!Т cried Tweedledum. СThe first thing in a visit is to say УHow dТye do?Ф and shake hands!Т And here the two brothers gave each other a hug, and then they held out the two hands that were free, to shake hands with her.

Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them first, for fear of hurting the other oneТs feelings; so, as the best way out of the difficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment they were dancing found in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered afterwards), and she was not even surprised to hear music playing: it seemed to come from the tree under which they were dancing, and it was done (as well as she could make it out) by the branches rubbing one across the other, like fiddles and fiddlesticks.

СBut it certainly was funny,Т (Alice said afterwards, when she was telling her sister the history of all this,) Сto find myself singing УHere we go round the mulberry bush.Ф[64 - УHere we go round the mulberry bushФ Ц Ёта песенка используетс€ в игре: ее поют, кружась в хороводе.] I donТt know when I began it, but somehow I felt as if IТd been singing it a long long time!Т

The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of breath. СFour times round is enough for one dance,Т Tweedledum panted out, and they left off dancing as suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped at the same moment.

Then they let go of AliceТs hands, and stood looking at her for a minute: there was a rather awkward pause, as Alice didnТt know how to begin a conversation with people she had just been dancing with. СIt would never do to say УHow dТye do?Ф now,Т she said to herself: Сwe seem to have got beyond that, somehow!Т

СI hope youТre not much tired?Т she said at last.

СNohow. And thank you very much for asking,Т said Tweedledum.

СSo much obliged!Т added Tweedledee. СYou like poetry?Т

СYees, pretty well Ц some poetry,Т Alice said doubtfully. СWould you tell me which road leads out of the wood?Т

СWhat shall I repeat to her?Т said Tweedledee, looking round at Tweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not noticing AliceТs question.

СУThe Walrus and the CarpenterФ is the longest,Т Tweedledum replied, giving his brother an affectionate hug.

Tweedledee began instantly:

СThe sun was shiningЦТ

Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. СIf itТs very long,Т she said, as politely as she could, Сwould you please tell me first which road ЦТ

Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again:

		СThe sun was shining on the sea,
		Shining with all his might:
		He did his very best to make
		The billows smooth and bright Ц
		And this was odd, because it was
		The middle of the night.
		The moon was shining sulkily,
		Because she thought the sun
		Had got no business to be there
		After the day was done Ц
		УItТs very rude of him,Ф she said,
		УTo come and spoil the fun!Ф
		The sea was wet as wet could be,
		The sands were dry as dry.
		You could not see a cloud, because
		No cloud was in the sky:
		No birds were flying over head Ц
		There were no birds to fly.
		The Walrus and the Carpenter
		Were walking close at hand:
		They wept like anything to see
		Such quantities of sand:
		УIf this were only cleared away,Ф
		They said, Уit would be grand!Ф
		УIf seven maids with seven mops
		Swept it for half a year,
		Do you suppose,Ф the Walrus said,
		УThat they could get it clear?Ф
		УI doubt it,Ф said the Carpenter,
		And shed a bitter tear.
		УO Oysters, come and walk with us!Ф
		The Walrus did beseech.
		УA pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
		Along the briny beach:
		We cannot do with more than four,
		To give a hand to each.Ф
		The eldest Oyster looked at him,
		But never a word he said:
		The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
		And shook his heavy head Ц
		Meaning to say he did not choose
		To leave the oysterbed.
		But four young oysters hurried up,
		All eager for the treat:
		Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
		Their shoes were clean and neat Ц
		And this was odd, because, you know,
		They hadnТt any feet.
		Four other Oysters followed them,
		And yet another four;
		And thick and fast they came at last,
		And more, and more, and more Ц
		All hopping through the frothy waves,
		And scrambling to the shore.
		The Walrus and the Carpenter
		Walked on a mile or so,
		And then they rested on a rock
		Conveniently low:
		And all the little Oysters stood
		And waited in a row.
		УThe time has come,Ф the Walrus said,
		УTo talk of many things:
		Of shoes Ц and ships Ц and sealingwax Ц
		Of cabbages Ц and kings Ц
		And why the sea is boiling hot Ц
		And whether pigs have wings.Ф
		УBut wait a bit,Ф the Oysters cried,
		УBefore we have our chat;
		For some of us are out of breath,
		And all of us are fat!Ф
		УNo hurry!Ф said the Carpenter.
		They thanked him much for that.
		УA loaf of bread,Ф the Walrus said,
		УIs what we chiefly need:
		Pepper and vinegar besides
		Are very good indeed Ц
		Now, if youТre ready, Oysters dear,
		We can begin to feed.Ф
		УBut not on us!Ф the Oysters cried,
		Turning a little blue.
		УAfter such kindness, that would be
		A dismal thing to do!Ф
		УThe night is fine,Ф the Walrus said
		СDo you admire the view?
		УIt was so kind of you to come!
		And you are very nice!Ф
		The Carpenter said nothing but
		УCut us another slice.
		I wish you were not quite so deaf Ц
		IТve had to ask you twice!Ф
		УIt seems a shame,Ф the Walrus said,
		УTo play them such a trick.
		After weТve brought them out so far,
		And made them trot so quick!Ф
		The Carpenter said nothing but
		УThe butterТs spread too thick!Ф
		УI weep for you,Ф the Walrus said:
		УI deeply sympathize.Ф
		With sobs and tears he sorted out
		Those of the largest size,
		Holding his pocket handkerchief
		Before his streaming eyes.
		УO Oysters,Ф said the Carpenter,
		УYouТve had a pleasant run!
		Shall we be trotting home again?Ф
		But answer came there none Ц
		And that was scarcely odd, because
		TheyТd eaten every one.Т

СI like the Walrus best,Т said Alice: Сbecause he was a little sorry for the poor oysters.Т

СHe ate more than the Carpenter, though,Т said Tweedledee. СYou see he held his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldnТt count how many he took: contrariwise.Т

СThat was mean!Т Alice said indignantly. СThen I like the Carpenter best Ц if he didnТt eat so many as the Walrus.Т

СBut he ate as many as he could get,Т said Tweedledum.

This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, СWell! They were both very unpleasant characters ЦТ Here she checked herself in some alarm, at hearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a large steamengine in the wood near them, though she feared it was more likely to be a wild beast. СAre there any lions or tigers about here?Т she asked timidly.

СItТs only the Red King snoring,Т said Tweedledee.

СCome and look at him!Т the brothers cried, and they each took one of AliceТs hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.

СIsnТt he a lovely sight?Т said Tweedledum.

Alice couldnТt say honestly that he was. He had a tall red nightcap[65 - Nightcap Ц ночные колпаки использовались в эпоху, когда спальни отапливались каминами.   утру температура в комнате падала, и колпак защищал голову от утреннего холода.] on, with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy heap, and snoring loud Ц Сfit to snore his head off!Т as Tweedledum remarked.

СIТm afraid heТll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,Т said Alice, who was a very thoughtful little girl.

СHeТs dreaming now,Т said Tweedledee: Сand what do you think heТs dreaming about?Т

Alice said СNobody can guess that.Т

СWhy, about you!Т Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands triumphantly. СAnd if he left off dreaming about you, where do you suppose youТd be?Т

СWhere I am now, of course,Т said Alice.

СNot you!Т Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. СYouТd be nowhere. Why, youТre only a sort of thing in his dream!Т

СIf that there King was to wake,Т added Tweedledum, СyouТd go out Ц bang! Ц just like a candle!Т

СI shouldnТt!Т Alice exclaimed indignantly. СBesides, if IТm only a sort of thing in his dream, what are you, I should like to know?Т

СDitto[66 - Ditto Ц точно, полностью согласен.]Т said Tweedledum.

СDitto, dittoТ cried Tweedledee.

He shouted this so loud that Alice couldnТt help saying СHush! YouТll be waking him, IТm afraid, if you make so much noise.Т

СWell, it no use your talking about waking him,Т said Tweedledum, Сwhen youТre only one of the things in his dream. You know very well youТre not real.Т

СI am real!Т said Alice, and began to cry.

СYou wonТt make yourself a bit realler by crying,Т Tweedledee remarked: СthereТs nothing to cry about.Т

СIf I wasnТt real,Т Alice said Ц halflaughing through her tears, it all seemed so ridiculous Ц СI shouldnТt be able to cry.Т

СI hope you donТt suppose those are real tears?Т Tweedledum interrupted in a tone of great contempt.

СI know theyТre talking nonsense,Т Alice thought to herself: Сand itТs foolish to cry about it.Т So she brushed away her tears, and went on, as cheerfully as she could. СAt any rate IТd better be getting out of the wood, for really itТs coming on very dark. Do you think itТs going to rain?Т

Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, and looked up into it. СNo, I donТt think it is,Т he said: Сat least Ц not under here. Nohow.Т

СBut it may rain outside?Т

СIt may Ц if it chooses,Т said Tweedledee: СweТve no objection. Contrariwise.Т

СSelfish things!Т thought Alice, and she was just going to say СGoodnightТ and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under the umbrella and seized her by the wrist.

СDo you see that?Т he said, in a voice choking with passion, and his eyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with a trembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.

СItТs only a rattle,Т Alice said, after a careful examination of the little white thing. СNot a rattle snake, you know,Т she added hastily, thinking that he was frightened: Сonly an old rattle Ц quite old and broken.Т

СI knew it was!Т cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly and tear his hair. СItТs spoilt, of course!Т Here he looked at Tweedledee, who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under the umbrella.

Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, СYou neednТt be so angry about an old rattle.Т

СBut it isnТt old!Т Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever. СItТs new, I tell you Ц I bought it yesterday Ц my nice NEW RATTLE!Т and his voice rose to a perfect scream.

All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella, with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, that it quite took off AliceТs attention from the angry brother. But he couldnТt quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up in the umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening and shutting his mouth and his large eyes Ц Сlooking more like a fish than anything else,Т Alice thought.

СOf course you agree to have a battle?Т Tweedledum said in a calmer tone.

СI suppose so,Т the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of the umbrella: Сonly she must help us to dress up, you know.Т

So the two brothers went off handinhand into the wood, and returned in a minute with their arms full of things Ц such as bolsters[67 - Bolster Ц длинна€ узка€ обычно кругла€ подушка.], blankets, hearthrugs, tablecloths, dishcovers and coalscuttles. СI hope youТre a good hand at pinning and tying strings?Т Tweedledum remarked. СEvery one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.Т

Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made about anything in all her life Ц the way those two bustled about Ц and the quantity of things they put on Ц and the trouble they gave her in tying strings and fastening buttons Ц СReally theyТll be more like bundles of old clothes that anything else, by the time theyТre ready!Т she said to herself, as she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, Сto keep his head from being cut off,Т as he said.

СYou know,Т he added very gravely, СitТs one of the most serious things that can possibly happen to one in a battle Ц to get oneТs head cut off.Т

Alice laughed loud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fear of hurting his feelings.

СDo I look very pale?Т said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmet tied on. (He called it a helmet, though it certainly looked much more like a saucepan.)

СWell Ц yes Ц a little,Т Alice replied gently.

СIТm very brave generally,Т he went on in a low voice: Сonly today I happen to have a headache.Т

СAnd IТve got a toothache!Т said Tweedledee, who had overheard the remark. СIТm far worse off than you!Т

СThen youТd better not fight today,Т said Alice, thinking it a good opportunity to make peace.

СWe must have a bit of a fight, but I donТt care about going on long,Т said Tweedledum. СWhatТs the time now?Т

Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said СHalfpast four.Т

СLetТs fight till six, and then have dinner,Т said Tweedledum.

СVery well,Т the other said, rather sadly: Сand she can watch us Ц only youТd better not come very close,Т he added: СI generally hit everything I can see Ц when I get really excited.Т

СAnd I hit everything within reach,Т cried Tweedledum, Сwhether I can see it or not!Т

Alice laughed. СYou must hit the trees pretty often, I should think,Т she said.

Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. СI donТt suppose,Т he said, СthereТll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, by the time weТve finished!Т

СAnd all about a rattle!Т said Alice, still hoping to make them a little ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.

СI shouldnТt have minded it so much,Т said Tweedledum, Сif it hadnТt been a new one.Т

СI wish the monstrous crow would come!Т though Alice.

СThereТs only one sword, you know,Т Tweedledum said to his brother: Сbut you can have the umbrella Ц itТs quite as sharp. Only we must begin quick. ItТs getting as dark as it can.Т

СAnd darker.Т said Tweedledee.

It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be a thunderstorm coming on. СWhat a thick black cloud that is!Т she said. СAnd how fast it comes! Why, I do believe itТs got wings!Т

СItТs the crow!Т Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: and the two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.

Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree. СIt can never get at me here,Т she thought: СitТs far too large to squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldnТt flap its wings so Ц it make quite a hurricane in the wood Ц hereТs somebodyТs shawl being blown away!Т




Chapter V

Wool and Water


She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: in another moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood, with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice very civilly went to meet her with the shawl.

СIТm very glad I happened to be in the way,Т Alice said, as she helped her to put on her shawl again.

The While Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort of way, and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that sounded like Сbreadandbutter, breadandbutter,Т and Alice felt that if there was to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So she began rather timidly: СAm I addressing the White Queen?Т

СWell, yes, if you call that adressing,Т The Queen said. СIt isnТt my notion of the thing, at all.Т

Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the very beginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, СIf your Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, IТll do it as well as I can.Т

СBut I donТt want it done at all!Т groaned the poor Queen. СIТve been adressing myself for the last two hours.Т

It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she had got some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. СEvery single thingТs crooked,Т Alice thought to herself, Сand sheТs all over pins! Ц May I put your shawl straight for you?Т she added aloud.

СI donТt know whatТs the matter with it!Т the Queen said, in a melancholy voice. СItТs out of temper, I think. IТve pinned it here, and IТve pinned it there, but thereТs no pleasing it!Т

СIt canТt go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,Т Alice said, as she gently put it right for her; Сand, dear me, what a state your hair is in!Т

СThe brush has got entangled in it!Т the Queen said with a sigh. СAnd I lost the comb yesterday.Т

Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hair into order. СCome, you look rather better now!Т she said, after altering most of the pins. СBut really you should have a ladyТs maid[68 - LadyТs maid Ц горнична€ хоз€йки; занималась плать€ми и украшени€ми дамы, укладывала ей волосы, помогала одетьс€ и раздетьс€ (что в ¬икторианскую эпоху было не такто просто). ¬ иерархии слуг это была довольно высока€ должность.]!Т

СIТm sure IТll take you with pleasure!Т the Queen said. СTwopence a week, and jam every other day.Т

Alice couldnТt help laughing, as she said, СI donТt want you to hire me Ц and I donТt care for jam.Т

СItТs very good jam,Т said the Queen.

СWell, I donТt want any today, at any rate.Т

СYou couldnТt have it if you did want it,Т the Queen said. СThe rule is, jam tomorrow and jam yesterday Ц but never jam today.Т

СIt must come sometimes to Уjam doday,Ф| Alice objected.

СNo, it canТt,Т said the Queen. СItТs jam every other day: today isnТt any other day, you know.Т

СI donТt understand you,Т said Alice. СItТs dreadfully confusing!Т

СThatТs the effect of living backwards,Т the Queen said kindly: Сit always makes one a little giddy at first ЦТ

СLiving backwards!Т Alice repeated in great astonishment. СI never heard of such a thing!Т

С Ц but thereТs one great advantage in it, that oneТs memory works both ways.Т

СIТm sure mine only works one way.Т Alice remarked. СI canТt remember things before they happen.Т

СItТs a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,Т the Queen remarked.

СWhat sort of things do you remember best?Т Alice ventured to ask.

СOh, things that happened the week after next,Т the Queen replied in a careless tone. СFor instance, now,Т she went on, sticking a large piece of plaster on her finger as she spoke, СthereТs the KingТs Messenger. HeТs in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesnТt even begin till next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of all.Т

СSuppose he never commits the crime?Т said Alice.

СThat would be all the better wouldnТt it?Т the Queen said, as she bound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.

Alice felt there was no denying that. СOf course it would be all the better,Т she said: Сbut it wouldnТt be all the better his being punished.Т

СYouТre wrong there, at any rate,Т said the Queen: Сwere you ever punished?Т

СOnly for faults,Т said Alice.

СAnd you were all the better for it, I know!Т the Queen said triumphantly.

СYes, but then I had done the things I was punished for,Т said Alice: Сthat makes all the difference.Т

СBut if you hadnТt done them,Т the Queen said, Сthat would have been better still; better, and better, and better!Т Her voice went higher with each Сbetter,Т till it got quite to a squeak at last.

Alice was just beginning to say СThereТs a mistake somewhere Ц,Т when the Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentence unfinished. СOh, oh, oh!Т shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as if she wanted to shake it off. СMy fingerТs bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!Т

Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steamengine, that Alice had to hold both her hands over her ears.

СWhat is the matter?Т she said, as soon as there was a chance of making herself heard. СHave you pricked your finger?Т

СI havenТt pricked it yet,Т the Queen said, Сbut I soon shall Ц oh, oh, oh!Т

СWhen do you expect to do it?Т Alice asked, feeling very much inclined to laugh.

СWhen I fasten my shawl again,Т the poor Queen groaned out: Сthe brooch will come undone directly. Oh, oh!Т As she said the words the brooch flew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it again.

СTake care!Т cried Alice. СYouТre holding it all crooked!Т And she caught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and the Queen had pricked her finger.

СThat accounts for the bleeding, you see,Т she said to Alice with a smile. СNow you understand the way things happen here.Т

СBut why donТt you scream now?Т Alice asked, holding her hands ready to put over her ears again.

СWhy, IТve done all the screaming already,Т said the Queen. СWhat would be the good of having it all over again?Т

By this time it was getting light. СThe crow must have flown away, I think,Т said Alice: СIТm so glad itТs gone. I thought it was the night coming on.Т

СI wish I could manage to be glad!Т the Queen said. СOnly I never can remember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, and being glad whenever you like!Т

СOnly it is so very lonely here!Т Alice said in a melancholy voice; and, at the thought of her loneliness, two large tears came rolling down her cheeks.

СOh, donТt go on like that!Т cried the poor Queen, wringing her hands in despair. СConsider what a great girl you are. Consider what a long way youТve come today. Consider what oТclock it is. Consider anything, only donТt cry!Т

Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears. СCan you keep from crying by considering things?Т she asked.

СThatТs the way itТs done,Т the Queen said with great decision: Сnobody can do two things at once, you know. LetТs consider your age to begin with Ц how old are you?Т

СIТm seven and a half exactly.Т

СYou neednТt say Уexactually,ФТ the Queen remarked: СI can believe it without that. Now IТll give you something to believe. IТm just one hundred and one, five months and a day.Т

СI canТt believe that!Т said Alice.

СCanТt you?Т the Queen said in a pitying tone. СTry again: draw a long breath, and shut your eyes.Т

Alice laughed. СThereТs not use trying,Т she said: Сone canТt believe impossible things.Т

СI daresay you havenТt had much practice,Т said the Queen. СWhen I was your age, I always did it for halfanhour a day. Why, sometimes IТve believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goes the shawl again!Т

The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sudden gust of wind blew the QueenТs shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread out her arms again, and went flying after it, and this time she succeeded in catching it for herself. СIТve got!Т she cried in a triumphant tone. СNow you shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!Т

СThen I hope your finger is better now?Т Alice said very politely, as she crossed the little brook after the Queen.


* * *

СOh, much better!Т cried the Queen, her voice rising to a squeak as she went on. СMuch beetter! Beetter! Beeeetter! Beeehh!Т The last word ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started.

She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly wrapped herself up in wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldnТt make out what had happened at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really Ц was it really a sheep that was sitting on the other side of the counter? Rub as she could, she could make nothing more of it: she was in a little dark shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter, and opposite to her was an old Sheep, sitting in an armchair knitting, and every now and then leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spectacles.

СWhat is it you want to buy?Т the Sheep said at last, looking up for a moment from her knitting.

СI donТt quite know yet,Т Alice said, very gently. СI should like to look all round me first, if I might.Т

СYou may look in front of you, and on both sides, if you like,Т said the Sheep; Сbut you canТt look all round you Ц unless youТve got eyes at the back of your head.Т

But these, as it happened, Alice had not got: so she contented herself with turning round, looking at the shelves as she came to them.

The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious things Ц but the oddest part of it all was that, whenever she looked hard at any shelf, to make out exactly what it had on it, that particular shelf was always quite empty, though the others round it were crowded as full as they could hold.

СThings flow about so here!Т she said at last in a plaintive tone, after she had spent a minute or so in vainly pursuing a large bright thing, that looked sometimes like a doll and sometimes like a workbox, and was always in the shelf next above the one she was looking at. СAnd this one is the most provoking of all Ц but IТll tell you what ЦТ she added, as a sudden thought struck her. СIТll follow it up to the very top shelf of all. ItТll puzzle it to go through the ceiling, I expect!Т

But even this plan failed: the СthingТ went through the ceiling as quietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it.

СAre you a child or a teetotum[69 - Teetotum Ц разновидность волчка: обычно квадратный, с подписанными на боках буквами и цифрами.]?Т the Sheep said, as she took up another pair of needles. СYouТll make me giddy soon, if you go on turning round like that.Т She was now working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alice couldnТt help looking at her in great astonishment.

СHow can she knit with so many?Т the puzzled child thought to herself. СShe gets more and more like a porcupine every minute!Т

СCan you row?Т the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of knittingneedles as she spoke.

СYes, a little Ц but not on land Ц and not with needles Ц Т Alice was beginning to say, when suddenly the needles turned into oars in her hands, and she found they were in a little boat, gliding along between banks: so there was nothing for it but to do her best.

СFeather![70 - Feather! Ц «десь подразумеваетс€ не птичье перо, а приказ развернуть весло плашм€.]Т cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair of needles.

This didnТt sound like a remark that needed any answer: so Alice said nothing, but pulled away. There was something very queer about the water, she thought, as every now and then the oars got fast in it, and would hardly come out again.

СFeather! Feather!Т the Sheep cried again, taking more needles. СYouТll be catching a crab[71 - Catching a crab Ц to catch a crab означает Ђне мочь выдернуть неудачно опущенное весло из воды или грести по воздухуї.] directly.Т

СA dear little crab!Т thought Alice. СI should like that.Т

СDidnТt you hear me say УFeatherФ?Т the Sheep cried angrily, taking up quite a bunch of needles.

СIndeed I did,Т said Alice: СyouТve said it very often Ц and very loud. Please, where are the crabs?Т

СIn the water, of course!Т said the Sheep, sticking some of the needles into her hair, as her hands were full. СFeather, I say!Т

СWhy do you say УFeatherФ so often?Т Alice asked at last, rather vexed. СIТm not a bird!Т

СYou are,Т said the Sheet: СyouТre a little goose[72 - Goose Ц это относительно м€гко сформулированное Ђдурачок/дурочкаї.].Т

This offended Alice a little, so there was no more conversation for a minute or two, while the boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds of weeds (which made the oars stick fast in the water, worse then ever), and sometimes under trees, but always with the same tall riverbanks frowning over their heads.

СOh, please! There are some scented rushes!Т Alice cried in a sudden transport of delight. СThere really are Ц and such beauties!Т

СYou neednТt say УpleaseФ to me about ТemТ the Sheep said, without looking up from her knitting: СI didnТt put Тem there, and IТm not going to take Тem away.Т

СNo, but I meant Ц please, may we wait and pick some?Т Alice pleaded. СIf you donТt mind stopping the boat for a minute.Т

СHow am I to stop it?Т said the Sheep. СIf you leave off rowing, itТll stop of itself.Т

So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it would, till it glided gently in among the waving rushes. And then the little sleeves were carefully rolled up, and the little arms were plunged in elbowdeep to get the rushes a good long way down before breaking them off Ц and for a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and the knitting, as she bent over the side of the boat, with just the ends of her tangled hair dipping into the water Ц while with bright eager eyes she caught at one bunch after another of the darling scented rushes.

СI only hope the boat wonТt tipple over!Т she said to herself. СOh, what a lovely one! Only I couldnТt quite reach it.Т And it certainly did seem a little provoking (Сalmost as if it happened on purpose,Т she thought) that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautiful rushes as the boat glided by, there was always a more lovely one that she couldnТt reach.

СThe prettiest are always further!Т she said at last, with a sigh at the obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, as, with flushed cheeks and dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back into her place, and began to arrange her newfound treasures.

What mattered it to her just than that the rushes had begun to fade, and to lose all their scent and beauty, from the very moment that she picked them? Even real scented rushes, you know, last only a very little while Ц and these, being dreamrushes, melted away almost like snow, as they lay in heaps at her feet Ц but Alice hardly noticed this, there were so many other curious things to think about.

They hadnТt gone much farther before the blade of one of the oars got fast in the water and wouldnТt come out again (so Alice explained it afterwards), and the consequence was that the handle of it caught her under the chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of СOh, oh, oh!Т from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, and down among the heap of rushes.

However, she wasnТt a bit hurt, and was soon up again: the Sheep went on with her knitting all the while, just as if nothing had happened. СThat was a nice crab you caught!Т she remarked, as Alice got back into her place, very much relieved to find herself still in the boat.

СWas it? I didnТt see it,Т said Alice, peeping cautiously over the side of the boat into the dark water. СI wish it hadnТt let go Ц I should so like a little crab to take home with me!Т But the Sheep only laughed scornfully, and went on with her knitting.

СAre there many crabs here?Т said Alice.

СCrabs, and all sorts of things,Т said the Sheep: Сplenty of choice, only make up your mind. Now, what do you want to buy?Т

СTo buy!Т Alice echoed in a tone that was half astonished and half frightened Ц for the oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished all in a moment, and she was back again in the little dark shop.

СI should like to buy an egg, please,Т she said timidly. СHow do you sell them?Т

СFivepence farthing for one Ц twopence for two,Т the Sheep replied.

СThen two are cheaper than one?Т Alice said in a surprised tone, taking out her purse.

СOnly you must eat them both, if you buy two,Т[73 - ѕо легенде, в некоторых заведени€х, если посетитель заказывал одно вареное €йцо, ему подавали сразу два, так как одно неизбежно оказывалось несвежим.] said the Sheep.

СThen IТll have one, please,Т said Alice, as she put the money down on the counter. For she thought to herself, СThey mightnТt be at all nice, you know.Т

The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a box: then she said СI never put things into peopleТs hands Ц that would never do Ц you must get it for yourself.Т And so saying, she went off to the other end of the shop, and set the egg upright on a shelf.

СI wonder why it wouldnТt do?Т thought Alice, as she groped her way among the tables and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards the end. СThe egg seems to get further away the more I walk towards it. Let me see, is this a chair? Why, itТs got branches, I declare! How very odd to find trees growing here! And actually hereТs a little brook! Well, this is the very queerest shop I ever saw!Т


* * *

So she went on, wondering more and more at every step, as everything turned into a tree the moment she came up to it, and she quite expected the egg to do the same.




Chapter VI

Humpty Dumpty


However, the egg only got larger and larger, and more and more human: when she had come within a few yards of it, she saw that it had eyes and a nose and mouth; and when she had come close to it, she saw clearly that it was HUMPTY DUMPTY[74 - Humpty Dumpty Ц это персонаж старинного детского стихотворени€. ќбычно его описывают как человека€йцо. ќдни исследователи предполагают, что образ был наве€н исторической личностью, другие утверждают, что так была названа огромна€ пушка. ѕроисхождение персонажа точно не установлено.] himself. СIt canТt be anybody else!Т she said to herself. СIТm as certain of it, as if his name were written all over his face.Т

It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on that enormous face. Humpty Dumpty was sitting, with his legs crossed like a Turk, on the top of a high wall Ц such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered how he could keep his balance Ц and, as his eyes were steadily fixed in the opposite direction, and he didnТt take the least notice of her, she thought he must be a stuffed figure after all.

СAnd how exactly like an egg he is!Т she said aloud, standing with her hands ready to catch him, for she was every moment expecting him to fall.

СItТs very provoking,Т Humpty Dumpty said after a long silence, looking away from Alice as he spoke, Сto be called an egg Ц very!Т

СI said you looked like an egg, Sir,Т Alice gently explained. СAnd some eggs are very pretty, you know,Т she added, hoping to turn her remark into a sort of compliment.

СSome people,Т said Humpty Dumpty, looking away from her as usual, Сhave no more sense than a baby!Т

Alice didnТt know what to say to this: it wasnТt at all like conversation, she thought, as he never said anything to her; in fact, his last remark was evidently addressed to a tree Ц so she stood and softly repeated to herself: Ц

		СHumpty Dumpty sat on a wall:
		Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
		All the KingТs horses and all the KingТs men
		CouldnТt put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.Т

СThat last line is much too long for the poetry,Т she added, almost out loud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.

СDonТt stand there chattering to yourself like that,Т Humpty Dumpty said, looking at her for the first time, Сbut tell me your name and your business.Т

СMy name is Alice, but ЦТ

СItТs a stupid name enough!Т Humpty Dumpty interrupted impatiently. СWhat does it mean?Т

СMust a name mean something?Т Alice asked doubtfully.

СOf course it must,Т Humpty Dumpty said with a sort laugh: Сmy name means the shape I am Ц and a good handsome shape it is, too. With a name like your, you might be any shape, almost.Т

СWhy do you sit out here all alone?Т said Alice, not wishing to begin an argument.

СWhy, because thereТs nobody with me!Т cried Humpty Dumpty. СDid you think I didnТt know the answer to that? Ask another.Т

СDonТt you think youТd be safer down on the ground?Т Alice went on, not with any idea of making another riddle, but simply in her goodnatured anxiety for the queer creature. СThat wall is so very narrow!Т

СWhat tremendously easy riddles you ask!Т Humpty Dumpty growled out. СOf course I donТt think so! Why, if ever I did fall off Ц which thereТs no chance of Ц but if I did ЦТ Here he pursed up his lips, and looked so solemn and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. СIf I did fall,Т he went on, СThe King has promised me Ц ah, you may turn pale, if you like! You didnТt think I was going to say that, did you? The King has promised me Ц with his very own mouth Ц to Ц to ЦТ

СTo send all his horses and all his men,Т Alice interrupted, rather unwisely.

СNow I declare thatТs too bad!Т Humpty Dumpty cried, breaking into a sudden passion. СYouТve been listening at doors Ц and behind trees Ц and down chimneys Ц or you couldnТt have known it!Т

СI havenТt, indeed!Т Alice said very gently. СItТs in a book.Т

СAh, well! They may write such things in a book,Т Humpty Dumpty said in a calmer tone. СThatТs what you call a History of England, that is. Now, take a good look at me! IТm one that has spoken to a King, I am: mayhap youТll never see such another: and, to show you IТm not proud, you may shake hands with me!Т And he grinned almost from ear to ear, as he leant forwards (and as nearly as possible fell of the wall in doing so) and offered Alice his hand. She watched him a little anxiously as she took it. СIf he smiled much more, the ends of his mouth might meet behind,Т she thought: Сand then I donТt know what would happen to his head! IТm afraid it would come off!Т

СYes, all his horses and all his men,Т Humpty Dumpty went on. СTheyТd pick me up again in a minute, they would! However, this conversation is going on a little too fast: letТs go back to the last remark but one.Т

СIТm afraid I canТt quite remember it,Т Alice said very politely.

СIn that case we start afresh,Т said Humpty Dumpty, Сand itТs my turn to choose a subject ЦТ (СHe talks about it just as if it was a game!Т thought Alice.) СSo hereТs a question for you. How old did you say you were?Т

Alice made a short calculation, and said СSeven years and six months.Т

СWrong!Т Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. СYou never said a word like it!Т

СI though you meant УHow old are you?ФТ Alice explained.

СIf IТd meant that, IТd have said it,Т said Humpty Dumpty.

Alice didnТt want to begin another argument, so she said nothing.

СSeven years and six months!Т Humpty Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. СAn uncomfortable sort of age. Now if youТd asked my advice, IТd have said УLeave off at sevenФ Ц but itТs too late now.Т

СI never ask advice about growing,Т Alice said indignantly.

СToo proud?Т the other inquired.

Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. СI mean,Т she said, Сthat one canТt help growing older.Т

СOne canТt, perhaps,Т said Humpty Dumpty; Сbut two can. With proper assistance, you might have left off at seven.Т

СWhat a beautiful belt youТve got on!Т Alice suddenly remarked. (They had had quite enough of the subject of age, she thought: and, if they really were to take turns in choosing subjects, it was her turn now.) СAt least,Т she corrected herself on second thoughts, Сa beautiful cravat, I should have said Ц no, a belt, I mean Ц I beg your pardon!Т she added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thoroughly offended, and she began to wish she hadnТt chosen that subject. СIf I only knew,Т she thought to herself, Сwhich was neck and which was waist!Т

Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he said nothing for a minute or two. When he did speak again, it was in a deep growl.

СIt is a Ц most Ц provoking Ц thing,Т he said at last, Сwhen a person doesnТt know a cravat from a belt!Т

СI know itТs very ignorant of me,Т Alice said, in so humble a tone that Humpty Dumpty relented.

СItТs a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. ItТs a present from the White King and Queen. There now!Т

СIs it really?Т said Alice, quite pleased to find that she had chosen a good subject, after all.

СThey gave it me,Т Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as he crossed one knee over the other and clasped his hands round it, Сthey gave it me Ц for an unbirthday present.Т

СI beg your pardon?Т Alice said with a puzzled air.

СIТm not offended,Т said Humpty Dumpty.

СI mean, what is and unbirthday present?Т

СA present given when it isnТt your birthday, of course.Т

Alice considered a little. СI like birthday presents best,Т she said at last.

СYou donТt know what youТre talking about!Т cried Humpty Dumpty. СHow many days are there in a year?Т

СThree hundred and sixtyfive,Т said Alice.

СAnd how many birthdays have you?Т

СOne.Т

СAnd if you take one from three hundred and sixtyfive, what remains?Т

СThree hundred and sixtyfour, of course.Т

Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. СIТd rather see that done on paper,Т he said.

Alice couldnТt help smiling as she took out her memorandumbook, and worked the sum for him:








Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at it carefully. СThat seems to be done right ЦТ he began.

СYouТre holding it upside down!Т Alice interrupted.

СTo be sure I was!Т Humpty Dumpty said gaily, as she turned it round for him. СI thought it looked a little queer. As I was saying, that seems to be done right Ц though I havenТt time to look it over thoroughly just now Ц and that shows that there are three hundred and sixtyfour days when you might get unbirthday presents ЦТ

СCertainly,Т said Alice.

СAnd only one for birthday presents, you know. ThereТs glory for you!Т

СI donТt know what you mean by Уglory,ФТ Alice said.

Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. СOf course you donТt Ц till I tell you. I meant УthereТs a nice knockdown argument for you!ФТ

СBut УgloryФ doesnТt mean Уa nice knockdown argument,ФТ Alice objected.

СWhen I use a word,Т Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a scornful tone, Сit means just what I choose it to mean Ц neither more nor less.Т

СThe question is,Т said Alice, Сwhether you can make words mean so many different things.Т

СThe question is,Т said Humpty Dumpty, Сwhich is to be master Ц thatТs all.Т

Alice was too much puzzled to say anything; so after a minute Humpty Dumpty began again. СTheyТve a temper, some of them Ц particularly verbs: theyТre the proudest Ц adjectives you can do anything with, but not verbs Ц however, I can manage the whole of them! Impenetrability! ThatТs what I say!Т

СWould you tell me, please,Т said Alice, Сwhat that means?Т

СNow you talk like a reasonable child,Т said Humpty Dumpty, looking very much pleased. СI meant by УimpenetrabilityФ that weТve had enough of that subject, and it would be just as well if youТd mention what you mean to do next, as I suppose you donТt mean to stop here all the rest of your life.Т

СThatТs a great deal to make one word mean,Т Alice said in a thoughtful tone.

СWhen I make a word do a lot of work like that,Т said Humpty Dumpty, СI always pay it extra.Т

СOh!Т said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make any other remark.

СAh, you should see Тem come round me of a Saturday night,Т Humpty Dumpty went on, wagging his head gravely from side to side, Сfor to get their wages, you know.Т

(Alice didnТt venture to ask what he paid them with; and so you see I canТt tell you.)

СYou seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,Т said Alice. СWould you kindly tell me the meaning of the poem called УJabberwockyФ?Т

СLetТs hear it,Т said Humpty Dumpty. СI can explain all the poems that were ever invented Ц and a good many that havenТt been invented just yet.Т

This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first verse: Ц

		СTwas brillig, and the slithy toves
		Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
		All mimsy were the borogoves,
		And the mome raths outgrabeТ.

СThatТs enough to begin with,Т Humpty Dumpty interrupted: Сthere are plenty of hard words there. УBrilligФ means four oТclock in the afternoon Ц the time when you begin broiling things for dinner.Т

СThatТll do very well,Т said Alice: and УslithyФ?Т

СWell, УslithyФ means Уlithe and slimy.Ф УLitheФ is the same as Уactive.Ф You see itТs like a portmanteau[75 - Portmanteau Ц большой чемодан, состо€щий из двух складывающихс€ равных частей. Portmanteau words Ц это слова, составленные из двух разных слов.] Ц there are two meanings packed up into one word.Т

СI see it now,Т Alice remarked thoughtfully: Сand what are УtovesФ?Т

СWell, УtovesФ are something like badgers Ц theyТre something like lizards Ц and theyТre something like corkscrews.Т

СThey must be very curiouslooking creatures.Т

СThey are that,Т said Humpty Dumpty: Сalso they make their nests under sundials Ц also they live on cheese.Т

СAnd whatТs to УgyreФ and to УgimbleФ?Т

СTo УgyreФ is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To УgimbleФ is to make holes like a gimblet.Т

СAnd Уthe wabeФ is the grassplot round a sundial, I suppose?Т said Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity.

СOf course it is. ItТs called Уwabe,Ф you know, because it goes a long way before it, and a long way behind itТ Ц

СAnd a long way beyond it on each side,Т Alice added.

СExactly so. Well, then, УmimsyФ is Уflimsy and miserableФ (thereТs another portmanteau for you). And a УborogoveФ is a thin shabbylooking bird with its feathers sticking out all round Ц something like a live mop.Т

СAnd then Уmome rathsФ?Т said Alice. СIТm afraid IТm giving you a great deal of trouble.Т

СWell, a УrathФ is a sort of green pig: but УmomeФ IТm not certain about. I think itТs short for Уfrom homeФ Ц meaning that theyТd lost their way, you know.Т

СAnd what does УoutgrabeФ mean?Т

СWell, УoutgribingФ is something between bellowing and whistling, with a kind of sneeze in the middle: however, youТll hear it done, maybe Ц down in the wood yonder Ц and, when youТve once heard it, youТll be quite content. WhoТs been repeating all that hard stuff to you?Т

СI read it in a book,Т said Alice. СBut I had some poetry repeated to me, much easier than that, by Ц Tweedledee, I think it was.Т

СAs to poetry, you know,Т said Humpty Dumpty, stretching out one of his great hands, СI can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it comes to that ЦТ

СOh, it neednТt come to that!Т Alice hastily said, hoping to keep him from beginning.

СThe piece IТm going to repeat,Т he went on without noticing her remark, Сwas written entirely for your amusement.Т

Alice felt that in that case she really ought to listen to it, so she sat down, and said СThank youТ rather sadly.

		СIn winter, when the fields are white,
		I sing this song for your delight ЦТ

only I donТt sing it,Т he added, as an explanation.

СI see you donТt,Т said Alice.

СIf you can see whether IТm singing or not, youТre sharper eyes than most.Т Humpty Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.

		СIn spring, when woods are getting green,
		IТll try and tell you what I mean:Т

СThank you very much,Т said Alice.

		СIn summer, when the days are long,
		Perhaps youТll understand the song:

		In autumn, when the leaves are brown,
		Take pen and ink, and write it down.Т

СI will, if I can remember it so long,Т said Alice.

СYou neednТt go on making remarks like that,Т Humpty Dumpty said: СtheyТre not sensible, and they put me out.Т

		СI sent a message to the fish:
		I told them УThis is what I wish.Ф

		The little fishes of the sea,
		They sent an answer back to me.

		The little fishesТ answer was
		УWe cannot do it, Sir, because ЦФТ

СIТm afraid I donТt quite understand,Т said Alice.

СIt gets easier further on,Т Humpty Dumpty replied.

		СI sent to them again to say
		УIt will be better to obey.Ф

		The fishes answered, with a grin,
		УWhy, what a temper you are in!Ф

		I told them once, I told them twice:
		They would not listen to advice.

		I took a kettle large and new,
		Fit for the deed I had to do.

		My heart went hop, my heart went thump:
		I filled the kettle at the pump.

		Then some one came to me and said,
		УThe little fishes are in bed.Ф

		I said to him, I said it plain,
		УThen you must wake them up again.Ф

		I said it very loud and clear:
		I went and shouted in his ear.Т

Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as he repeated this verse, and Alice thought with a shudder, СI wouldnТt have been the messenger for anything!Т

		СBut he was very stiff and proud:
		He said УYou neednТt shout so loud!Ф

		And he was very proud and stiff:
		He said УIТd go and wake them, if ЦФ

		I took a corkscrew from the shelf:
		I went to wake them up myself.
		And when I found the door was locked,
		I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.

		And when I found the door was shut,
		I tried to turn the handle, but ЦТ

There was a long pause.

СIs that all?Т Alice timidly asked.

СThatТs all,Т said Humpty Dumpty. Goodbye.Т

This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a very strong hint that she ought to be going, she felt that it would hardly be civil to stay. So she got up, and held out her hand. СGoodbye, till we meet again!Т she said as cheerfully as she could.

СI shouldnТt know you again if we did meet,Т Humpty Dumpty replied in a discontented tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake: СyouТre so exactly like other people.Т

СThe face is what one goes by, generally,Т Alice remarked in a thoughtful tone.

СThatТs just what I complain of,Т said Humpty Dumpty. СYour face is the same as everybody has Ц the two eyes, soТ Ц (marking their places in the air with his thumb) Сnose in the middle, mouth under. ItТs always the same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, for instance Ц or the mouth at the top Ц that would be some help.Т

СIt wouldnТt look nice,Т Alice objected. But Humpty Dumpty only shut his eyes and said СWait till youТve tried.Т

Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, but, as he never opened his eyes or took any further notice of her, she said СGoodbye!Т once more, and, getting no answer to this, she quietly walked away: but she couldnТt help saying to herself, as she went, СOf all the unsatisfactory ЦТ (she repeated this aloud, as it was a great comfort to have such a long word to say) Сof all the unsatisfactory people I ever met ЦТ She never finished the sentence, for at this moment a heavy crash shook the forest from end to end.




Chapter VII

The Lion and The Unicorn[76 - The Lion and the Unicorn Ц лев и единорог, символы ¬еликобритании, изображенные на ее гербе, а также персонажи попул€рной песенки, котора€ цитируетс€ в этой главе.]


The next moment soldiers came running through the wood, at first in twos and threes, then ten or twenty together, and at last in such crowds that they seemed to fill the whole forest. Alice got behind a tree, for fear of being run over, and watched them go by.

She thought that in all her life she had never seen soldiers so uncertain on their feet: they were always tripping over something or other, and whenever one went down, several more always fell over him, so that the ground was soon covered with little heaps of men.

Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed rather better than the footsoldiers: but even they stumbled now and then; and it seemed to be a regular rule that, whenever a horse stumbled, the rider fell off instantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and Alice was very glad to get out of the wood into an open place, where she found the White King seated on the ground, busily writing in his memorandumbook.

СIТve sent them all!Т the King cried in a tone of delight, on seeing Alice. СDid you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you came through the wood?Т

СYes, I did,Т said Alice: Сseveral thousand, I should think.Т

СFour thousand two hundred and seven, thatТs the exact number,Т the King said, referring to his book. СI couldnТt send all the horses, you know, because two of them are wanted in the game. And I havenТt sent the two Messengers, either. TheyТre both gone to the town. Just look along the road, and tell me if you can see either of them.Т

СI see nobody on the road,Т said Alice.

СI only wish I had such eyes,Т the King remarked in a fretful tone. СTo be able to see Nobody! And at that distance, too! Why, itТs as much as I can do to see real people, by this light!Т

All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently along the road, shading her eyes with one hand. СI see somebody now!Т she exclaimed at last. СBut heТs coming very slowly Ц and what curious attitudes he goes into!Т (For the Messenger kept skipping up and down, and wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great hands spread out like fans on each side.)

СNot at all,Т said the King. СHeТs an AngloSaxon Messenger Ц and those are AngloSaxon attitudes[77 - AngloSaxon attitudes Ц то есть очень замысловато.]. He only does them when heТs happy. His name is Haigha.Т (He pronounced it so as to rhyme with Сmayor.Т)

СI love my love with an H,Т[78 - I love my love with an H Ц это попул€рна€ салонна€ игра ¬икторианской эпохи. ¬се положенные фразы нужно было закончить словами, начинающимис€ с одной буквы, переход€ затем к следующей букве алфавита.] Alice couldnТt help beginning,Т because he is Happy. I hate him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed him with Ц with Ц with Hamsandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and he lives ЦТ

СHe lives on the Hill,Т the King remarked simply, without the least idea that he was joining in the game, while Alice was still hesitating for the name of a town beginning with H. СThe other MessengerТs called Hatta. I must have two, you know Ц to come and go. Once to come, and one to go.Т

СI beg your pardon?Т said Alice.

СIt isnТt respectable to beg,Т said the King.

СI only meant that I didnТt understand,Т said Alice. СWhy one to come and one to go?Т

СDonТt I tell you?Т the King repeated impatiently. СI must have two Ц to fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one to carry.Т

At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too much out of breath to say a word, and could only wave his hands about, and make the most fearful faces at the poor King.

СThis young lady loves you with an H,Т the King said, introducing Alice in the hope of turning off the MessengerТs attention from himself Ц but it was no use Ц the AngloSaxon attitudes only got more extraordinary every moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to side.

СYou alarm me!Т said the King. СI feel faint Ц Give me a ham sandwich!Т

On which the Messenger, to AliceТs great amusement, opened a bag that hung round his neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who devoured it greedily.

СAnother sandwich!Т said the King.

СThereТs nothing but hay left now,Т the Messenger said, peeping into the bag.

СHay, then,Т the King murmured in a faint whisper.

Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. СThereТs nothing like eating hay when youТre faint,Т he remarked to her, as he munched away.

СI should think throwing cold water over you would be better,Т Alice suggested: СЦor some salvolatile[79 - Salvolatile Ц нюхательна€ соль, смесь на основе нашатырного спирта, которую давали вдохнуть при обмороке.].Т

СI didnТt say there was nothing better,Т the King replied. СI said there was nothing like it.Т Which Alice did not venture to deny.

СWho did you pass on the road?Т the King went on, holding out his hand to the Messenger for some more hay.

СNobody,Т said the Messenger.

СQuite right,Т said the King: Сthis young lady saw him too. So of course Nobody walks slower than you.

СI do my best,Т the Messenger said in a sullen tone. СIТm sure nobody walks much faster than I do!Т

СHe canТt do that,Т said the King, Сor else heТd have been here first. However, now youТve got your breath, you may tell us whatТs happened in the town.Т

СIТll whisper it,Т said the Messenger, putting his hands to his mouth in the shape of a trumpet, and stooping so as to get close to the KingТs ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to hear the news too. However, instead of whispering, he simply shouted at the top of his voice, СTheyТre at it again!Т

СDo you call that a whisper?Т cried the poor King, jumping up and shaking himself. СIf you do such a thing again, IТll have you buttered! It went through and through my head like an earthquake!Т

СIt would have to be a very tiny earthquake!Т thought Alice. СWho are at it again?Т she ventured to ask.

СWhy the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,Т said the King.

СFighting for the crown?Т

СYes, to be sure,Т said the King: Сand the best of the joke is, that itТs my crown all the while! LetТs run and see them.Т And they trotted off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran, the words of the old song: Ц

		СThe Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown.
		The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.
		Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown:
		Some gave them plumcake and drummed them out of town[80 - Drummed them out of town Ц выражение drum smb out of town означает Ђизгнать с позоромї.].Т

СDoes Ц the one Ц that wins Ц get the crown?Т she asked, as well as she could, for the run was putting her quite out of breath.

СDear me, no!Т said the King. СWhat an idea!Т

СWould you Ц be good enough ЦТ Alice panted out, after running a little further, Сto stop a minute Ц just to get Ц oneТs breath again?Т

СIТm good enough,Т the King said, Сonly IТm not strong enough. You see, a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to stop a Bandersnatch!Т

Alice had no more breath for talking, so the trotted on in silence, till they came in sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which the Lion and Unicorn were fighting. They were in such a cloud of dust, that at first Alice could not make out which was which; but she soon managed to distinguish the Unicorn by his horn.

They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other Messenger, was standing watching the fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a piece of breadandbutter in the other.

СHeТs only just out of prison, and he hadnТt finished his tea when he was sent in,Т Haigha whispered to Alice: Сand they only give them oystershells in there Ц so you see heТs very hungry and thirsty. How are you, dear child?Т he went on, putting his arm affectionately round HattaТs neck.

Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.

СWere you happy in prison, dear child?Т said Haigha.

Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled down his cheek; but not a word would he say.

СSpeak, canТt you!Т Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munched away, and drank some more tea.

СSpeak, wonТt you!Т cried the King. СHow are they getting on with the fight?Т

Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece of breadandbutter. СTheyТre getting on very well,Т he said in a choking voice: Сeach of them has been down about eightyseven times.Т

СThen I suppose theyТll soon bring the white bread and the brown?Т Alice ventured to remark.

СItТs waiting for Сem now,Т said Hatta; Сthis is a bit of it as IТm eating.Т

There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicorn sat down, panting, while the King called out СTen minutes allowed for refreshments!Т Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying round trays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was very dry.

СI donТt think theyТll fight any more today,Т the King said to Hatta: Сgo and order the drums to begin.Т And Hatta went bounding away like a grasshopper.

For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly she brightened up. СLook, look!Т she cried, pointing eagerly. СThereТs the White Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the wood over yonder Ц Ц How fast those Queens can run!Т

СThereТs some enemy after, her no doubt,Т the King said, without even looking round. СThat woodТs full of them.Т

СBut arenТt you going to run and help her?Т Alice asked, very much surprised at his taking it so quietly.

СNo use, no use!Т said the King. СShe runs so fearfully quick. You might as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But IТll make a memorandum about her, if you like Ц Ц SheТs a dear good creature,Т he repeated softly to himself, as he opened his memorandumbook. СDo you spell УcreatureФ with a double УeФ?Т

At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in his pockets. СI had the best of it this time?Т he said to the King, just glancing at him as he passed.

СA little Ц a little,Т the King replied, rather nervously. СYou shouldnТt have run him through with your horn, you know.Т

СIt didnТt hurt him,Т the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going on, when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round rather instantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of the deepest disgust.

СWhat Ц is Ц this?Т he said at last.

СThis is a child!Т Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice to introduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in an AngloSaxon attitude. СWe only found it today. ItТs as large as life, and twice as natural!Т

СI always thought they were fabulous monsters!Т said the Unicorn. СIs at alive?Т

СIt can talk,Т said Haigha solemnly.

The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said СTalk, child.Т

Alice could not help her lips curing up into a smile as she began: СDo you know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too? I never saw one alive before!Т

СWell, now that we have seen each other,Т said the Unicorn, Сif youТll believe in me, IТll believe in you. Is that a bargain?Т

СYes, if you like,Т said Alice.

СCome, fetch out the plumcake, old man!Т the Unicorn went on, turning from her to the King. СNone of your brown bread for me!Т

СCertainly Ц certainly!Т the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. СOpen the bag!Т he whispered. СQuick! Not that one Ц thatТs full of hay!Т

Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold, while he got out a dish and carvingknife. How they all came out of it Alice couldnТt guess. It was just like a conjuringtrick[81 - Conjuringtrick Ц фокус.], she thought.

The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very tired and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. СWhatТs this!Т he said, blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone that sounded like the tolling of a great bell.

СAh, what is it, now?Т the Unicorn cried eagerly. СYouТll never guess! I couldnТt.Т

The Lion looked at Alice wearily. СAre you animal Ц vegetable Ц or mineral?Т he said, yawning at every other word.

СItТs a fabulous monster!Т the Unicorn cried out, before Alice could reply.

СThen hand round the plumcake, Monster,Т the Lion said, lying down and putting his chin on his paws. СAnd sit down, both of you,Т (to the King and the Unicorn): Сfair play with the cake, you know!Т

The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down between the two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.

СWhat a fight we might have for the crown, now!Т the Unicorn said, looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shaking off his head, he trembled so much.

СI should win easy,Т said the Lion.

СIТm not so sure of that,Т said the Unicorn.

СWhy, I beat you all round the town, you chicken[82 - Chicken Ц трус.]!Т the Lion replied angrily, half getting up as he spoke.

Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was very nervous, and his voice quite quivered. СAll round the town?Т he said. СThatТs a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or the marketplace? You get the best view by the old bridge.Т

СIТm sure I donТt know,Т the Lion growled out as he lay down again. СThere was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is, cutting up that cake!Т

Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the great dish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. СItТs very provoking!Т she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite used to being called Сthe MonsterТ). СIТve cut several slices already, but they always join on again!Т

СYou donТt know how to manage Lookingglass cakes,Т the Unicorn remarked. СHand it round first, and cut it afterwards.Т

This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carried the dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as she did so. СNow cut it up,Т said the Lion, as she returned to her place with the empty dish.

СI say, this isnТt fair!Т cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with the knife in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. СThe Monster has given the Lion twice as much as me!Т

СSheТs kept none for herself, anyhow,Т said the Lion. СDo you like plumcake, Monster?Т

But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.

Where the noise came from, she couldnТt make out: the air seemed full of it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quite deafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook in her terror,


* * *

and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet, with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before she dropped to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying to shut out the dreadful uproar.

СIf that doesnТt Уdrum them out of town,ФТ she thought to herself, Сnothing ever will!Т




Chapter VIII

СItТs My Own InventionТ


After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was dead silence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no one to be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreaming about the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer AngloSaxon Messengers. However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which she had tried to cut the plumcake, СSo I wasnТt dreaming, after all,Т she said to herself, Сunless Ц unless weТre all part of the same dream. Only I do hope itТs my dream, and not the Red KingТs! I donТt like belonging to another personТs dream,Т she went on in a rather complaining tone: СIТve a great mind to go and wake him, and see what happens!Т

At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of СAhoy![83 - Ahoy! Ц устаревший способ окликнуть когол., часто используетс€ в юмористическом контексте.] Ahoy! Check![84 - Check Ц шах (угроза королю противника).]Т and a Knight, dressed in crimson armour, came galloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached her, the horse stopped suddenly: СYouТre my prisoner!Т the Knight cried, as he tumbled off his horse.

Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herself at the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again. As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more СYouТre myЦТ but here another voice broke in СAhoy! Ahoy! Check!Т and Alice looked round in some surprise for the new enemy.

This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at AliceТs side, and tumbled off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got on again, and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some time without speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in some bewilderment.

СSheТs my prisoner, you know!Т the Red Knight said at last.

СYes, but then I came and rescued her!Т the White Knight replied.

СWell, we must fight for her, then,Т said the Red Knight, as he took up his helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape of a horseТs head) and put it on.

СYou will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?Т the White Knight remarked, putting on his helmet too.

СI always do,Т said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at each other with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the way of the blows.

СI wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,Т she said to herself, as she watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hidingplace: СOne Rule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him off his horse; and if he misses, he tumbles off himself Ц and another Rule seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they were Punch and Judy Ц What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like a whole set of fireirons falling into the fender! And how quiet the horses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they were tables!Т

Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be that they always fell on their heads; and the battle ended with their both falling off in this way, side by side. When they got up again, they shook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.

СIt was a glorious victory, wasnТt it?Т said the White Knight, as he came up panting.

СI donТt know,Т Alice said doubtfully. СI donТt want to be anybodyТs prisoner. I want to be a Queen.Т

СSo you will, when youТve crossed the next brook,Т said the White Knight. СIТll see you safe to the end of the wood Ц and then I must go back, you know. ThatТs the end of my move.Т

СThank you very much,Т said Alice. СMay I help you off with your helmet?Т It was evidently more than he could manage by himself: however, she managed to shake him out of it at last.

СNow one can breathe more easily,Т said the Knight, putting back his shaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild eyes to Alice.[85 - »сследователи утверждают, что это описание самого Ћьюиса  эрролла.  артину дополн€ют живое воображение рыцар€, его неуклюжие ужимки и неспособность сопровождать јлису на ее пути в королевы.] She thought she had never seen such a strangelooking soldier in all her life.

He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, and he had a queershaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder, upsidedown, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with great curiosity.

СI see youТre admiring my little box,Т the Knight said in a friendly tone. СItТs my own invention Ц to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You see I carry it upsidedown, so that the rain canТt get in.Т

СBut the things can get out,Т Alice gently remarked. СDo you know the lidТs open?Т

СI didnТt know it,Т the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing over his face. СThen all the things much have fallen out! And the box is no use without them.Т He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going to throw it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him, and he hung it carefully on a tree. СCan you guess why I did that?Т he said to Alice.

Alice shook her head.

СIn hopes some bees may make a nest in it Ц then I should get the honey.Т

СBut youТve got a beehive Ц or something like one Ц fastened to the saddle,Т said Alice.

СYes, itТs a very good beehive,Т the Knight said in a discontented tone, Сone of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet. And the other thing is a mousetrap. I suppose the mice keep the bees out Ц or the bees keep the mice out, I donТt know which.Т

СI was wondering what the mousetrap was for,Т said Alice. СIt isnТt very likely there would be any mice on the horseТs back.Т

СNot very likely, perhaps,Т said the Knight; Сbut, if they do come, I donТt choose to have them running all about.Т

СYou see,Т he went on after a pause, СitТs as well to be provided for everything. ThatТs the reason the horse has all those anklets round his feet.Т

СBut what are they for?Т Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

СTo guard against the bites of sharks,Т the Knight replied. СItТs an invention of my own. And now help me on. IТll go with you to the end of the wood Ц WhatТs that dish for?Т

СItТs meant for plumcake,Т said Alice.

СWeТd better take it with us,Т the Knight said. СItТll come in handy if we find any plumcake. Help me to get it into this bag.Т

This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag open very carefully, because the Knight was so very awkward in putting in the dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himself instead. СItТs rather a tight fit, you see,Т he said, as they got it in a last; СThere are so many candlesticks in the bag.Т And he hung it to the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, and fireirons, and many other things.

СI hope youТve got your hair well fastened on?Т he continued, as they set off.

СOnly in the usual way,Т Alice said, smiling.

СThatТs hardly enough,Т he said, anxiously. СYou see the wind is so very strong here. ItТs as strong as soup.Т

СHave you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?Т Alice enquired.

СNot yet,Т said the Knight. СBut IТve got a plan for keeping it from falling off.Т

СI should like to hear it, very much.Т

СFirst you take an upright stick,Т said the Knight. СThen you make your hair creep up it, like a fruittree. Now the reason hair falls off is because it hangs down Ц things never fall upwards, you know. ItТs a plan of my own invention. You may try it if you like.Т

It didnТt sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a few minutes she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now and then stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was not a good rider.

Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off in front; and, whenever it went on again (which it generally did rather suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except that he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and, as he generally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soon found that it was the best plan not to walk quite close to the horse.

СIТm afraid youТve not had much practice in riding,Т she ventured to say, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.

The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at the remark. СWhat makes you say that?Т he asked, as he scrambled back into the saddle, keeping hold of AliceТs hair with one hand, to save himself from falling over on the other side.

СBecause people donТt fall off quite so often, when theyТve had much practice.Т

СIТve had plenty of practice,Т the Knight said very gravely: Сplenty of practice!Т

Alice could think of nothing better to say than СIndeed?Т but she said it as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence after this, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice watching anxiously for the next tumble.

СThe great art of riding,Т the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice, waving his right arm as he spoke, Сis to keep ЦТ Here the sentence ended as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of his head exactly in the path were Alice was walking. She was quite frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked him up, СI hope no bones are broken?Т

СNone to speak of,Т the Knight said, as if he didnТt mind breaking two or three of them. СThe great art of riding, as I was saying, is Ц to keep your balance properly. Like this, you know ЦТ

He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alice what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under the horseТs feet.

СPlenty of practice!Т he went on repeating, all the time that Alice was getting him on his feet again. СPlenty of practice!Т

СItТs too ridiculous!Т cried Alice, losing all her patience this time. СYou ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!Т

СDoes that kind go smoothly?Т the Knight asked in a tone of great interest, clasping his arms round the horseТs neck as he spoke, just in time to save himself from tumbling off again.

СMuch more smoothly than a live horse,Т Alice said, with a little scream of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.

СIТll get one,Т the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. СOne or two Ц several.Т

There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went on again. СIТm a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay you noticed, the last time you picked me up, that I was looking rather thoughtful?Т

СYou were a little grave,Т said Alice.

СWell, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate Ц would you like to hear it?Т

СVery much indeed,Т Alice said politely.

СIТll tell you how I came to think of it,Т said the Knight. СYou see, I said to myself УThe only difficulty is with the feet: the head is high enough already.Ф Now, first I put my head on the top of the gate Ц then the headТs high enough Ц then I stand on my head Ц then the feet are high enough, you see Ц then IТm over, you see.Т

СYes, I suppose youТd be over when that was done,Т Alice said thoughtfully: Сbut donТt you think it would be rather hard?Т

СI havenТt tried it yet,Т the Knight said, gravely; Сso I canТt tell for certain Ц but IТm afraid it would be a little hard.Т

He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily. СWhat a curious helmet youТve got!Т she said cheerfully. СIs that your invention too?Т

The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which hung from the saddle. СYes,Т he said; Сbut IТve invented a better one than that Ц like a sugar loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off the horse, it always touched the ground directly. So I had a very little way to fall, you see Ц But there was the danger of falling into it, to be sure. That happened to me once Ц and the worst of it was, before I could get out again, the other White Knight came and put it on. He thought it was his own helmet.Т

The Knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did not dare to laugh. СIТm afraid you must have hurt him,Т she said in a trembling voice, Сbeing on the top of his head.Т

СI had to kick him, of course,Т the Knight said, very seriously. СAnd then he took the helmet off again Ц but it took hours and hours to get me out. I was as fast as Ц as lightning, you know.Т

СBut thatТs a different kind of fastness,Т Alice objected.

The Knight shook his head. СIt was all kinds of fastness with me, I can assure you!Т he said. He raised his hands in some excitement as he said this, and instantly rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into a deep ditch.

Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She was rather startled by the fall, as for some time he had kept on very well, and she was afraid that he really was hurt this time. However, though she could see nothing but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved to hear that he was talking on in his usual tone. СAll kinds of fastness,Т he repeated: Сbut it was careless of him to put another manТs helmet on Ц with the man in it, too.Т

СHow can you go on talking so quietly, head downwards?Т Alice asked, as she dragged him out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the bank.

The Knight looked surprised at the question. СWhat does it matter where my body happens to be?Т he said. СMy mind goes on working all the same. In fact, the more head downwards I am, the more I keep inventing new things.Т

СNow the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,Т he went on after a pause, Сwas inventing a new pudding during the meatcourse[86 - Meatcourse Ц парадный обед состо€л из подаваемых в определенной последовательности блюд. ¬се начиналось с закусок, супа, рыбы, дичи, затем подавались жаркое и десерт.].Т

СIn time to have it cooked for the next course?Т said Alice. СWell, that was quick work, certainly!Т

СWell, not the next course,Т the Knight said in a slow thoughtful tone: Сno, certainly not the next course.Т

СThen it would have to be the next day. I suppose you wouldnТt have two puddingcourses in one dinner?Т

СWell, not the next day,Т the Knight repeated as before: Сnot the next day. In fact,Т he went on, holding his head down, and his voice getting lower and lower, СI donТt believe that pudding ever was cooked! In fact, I donТt believe that pudding ever will be cooked! And yet it was a very clever pudding to invent.Т

СWhat did you mean it to be made of?Т Alice asked, hoping to cheer him up, for the poor Knight seemed quite lowspirited about it.

It began with blottingpaper,Т the Knight answered with a groan.

СThat wouldnТt be very nice, IТm afraid ЦТ

СNot very nice alone,Т he interrupted, quite eagerly: Сbut youТve no idea what a difference it makes, mixing it with other things Ц such as gunpowder and sealingwax. And here I must leave you.Т They had just come to the end of the wood.

Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of the pudding.

СYou are sad,Т the Knight said in an anxious tone: Сlet me sing you a song to comfort you.Т

СIs it very long?Т Alice asked, for she had heard a good deal of poetry that day.

СItТs long,Т said the Knight, Сbut very, very beautiful. Everybody that hears me sing it Ц either it brings the tears into their eyes, or else ЦТ

СOr else what?Т said Alice, for the Knight had made a sudden pause.

СOr else it doesnТt, you know. The name of the song is called УHaddocksТ Eyes.ФТ

СOh, thatТs the name of the song, is it?Т Alice said, trying to feel interested.

СNo, you donТt understand,Т the Knight said, looking a little vexed. СThatТs what the name is called. The name really is УThe Aged Aged Man.ФТ

СThen I ought to have said УThatТs what the song is calledФ?Т Alice corrected herself.

СNo, you oughtnТt: thatТs quite another thing! The song is called УWays and MeansФ: but thatТs only what itТs called, you know!Т

СWell, what is the song, then?Т said Alice, who was by this time completely bewildered.

СI was coming to that,Т the Knight said. СThe song really is УAsitting on a GateФ: and the tuneТs my own invention.Т

So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on its neck: then, slowly beating time with one hand, and with a faint smile lighting up his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the music of his song, he began.

Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey Through The LookingGlass, this was the one that she always remembered most clearly. Years afterwards she could bring the whole scene back again, as if it had been only yesterday Ц the mild blue eyes and kindly smile of the Knight Ц the setting sun gleaming through his hair, and shining on his armour in a blaze of light that quite dazzled her Ц the horse quietly moving about, with the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the grass at her feet Ц and the black shadows of the forest behind Ц all this she took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading her eyes, she leant against a tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in a half dream, to the melancholy music of the song.

СBut the tune isnТt his own invention,Т she said to herself: СitТs УI give thee all, I can no more.ФТ She stood and listened very attentively, but no tears came into her eyes.

		СIТll tell thee everything I can:[87 - IТll tell thee everything I can Ц считаетс€, что это стихотворение было наве€но поэмой ”иль€ма ¬одсворта (1770Ц1850) Ђ–ешительность и независимостьї.]
		ThereТs little to relate.
		I saw an aged aged man,
		Asitting on a gate.
		УWho are you, aged man?Ф I said.
		УAnd how is it you live?Ф
		And his answer trickled through my head,
		Like water through a sieve.
		He said УI look for butterflies
		That sleep among the wheat:
		I make them into muttonpies,
		And sell them in the street.
		I sell them unto men,Ф he said,
		СWho sail on stormy seas;
		And thatТs the way I get my bread Ц
		A trifle, if you please.Ф
		But I was thinking of a plan
		To dye oneТs whiskers[88 - Whiskers Ц бакенбарды; в ¬икторианскую эпоху они были в моде.] green,
		And always use so large a fan
		That they could not be seen.
		So, having no reply to give
		To what the old man said,
		I cried, УCome, tell me how you live!Ф
		And thumped him on the head.
		His accents mild took up the tale:
		He said УI go my ways,
		And when I find a mountainrill,
		I set it in a blaze;
		And thence they make a stuff they call
		RolandsТ Macassar Oil Ц
		Yet twopencehalfpenny is all
		They give me for my toil.Ф
		But I was thinking of a way
		To feed oneself on batter[89 - Batter Ц жидкое тесто из муки, €иц, молока и/или воды, обычно используетс€ дл€ блинчиков и кл€ра.],
		And so go on from day to day
		Getting a little fatter.
		I shook him well from side to side,
		Until his face was blue:
		УCome, tell me how you live,Ф I cried,
		УAnd what it is you do!Ф
		He said УI hunt for haddocksТ eyes
		Among the heather bright,
		And work them into waistcoatbuttons
		In the silent night.
		And these I do not sell for gold
		Or coin of silvery shine,
		But for a copper halfpenny,
		And that will purchase nine.
		УI sometimes dig for buttered rolls,
		Or set limed twigs for crabs:
		I sometimes search the grassy knolls
		For wheels of Hansomcabs[90 - Hansomcabs Ц хэнсом Ц двухколесный экипаж дл€ двоих пассажиров с кучерским местом сзади, изобретенный ƒжозефом ’энсомом и запатентованный в 1834 г.].
		And thatТs the wayФ (he gave a wink)
		УBy which I get my wealth Ц
		And very gladly will I drink
		Your HonourТs noble health.Ф
		I heard him then, for I had just
		Completed my design
		To keep the Menai bridge[91 - Menai Bridge Ц подвесной мост, соедин€ющий остров »нглеси с материковым ”эльсом. Ѕыл построен по проекту “омаса “елфорда в 1826 г.] from rust
		By boiling it in wine.
		I thanked much for telling me
		The way he got his wealth,
		But chiefly for his wish that he
		Might drink my noble health.
		And now, if eТer by chance I put
		My fingers into glue,
		Or madly squeeze a righthand foot
		Into a lefthand shoe,
		Or if I drop upon my toe
		A very heavy weight,
		I weep, for it reminds me so
		Of that old man I used to know Ц
		Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,
		Whose hair was whiter than the snow,
		Whose face was very like a crow,
		With eyes, like cinders, all aglow,
		Who seemed distracted with his woe,
		Who rocked his body to and fro,
		And muttered mumblingly and low,
		As if his mouth were full of dough,
		Who snorted like a buffalo Ц
		That summer evening long ago,
		Asitting on a gate.Т

As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he gathered up the reins, and turned his horseТs head along the road by which they had come. СYouТve only a few yards to go,Т he said,Т down the hill and over that little brook, and then youТll be a Queen Ц But youТll stay and see me off first?Т he added as Alice turned with an eager look in the direction to which he pointed. СI shanТt be long. YouТll wait and wave your handkerchief when I get to that turn in the road! I think itТll encourage me, you see.Т

СOf course IТll wait,Т said Alice: Сand thank you very much for coming so far Ц and for the song Ц I liked it very much.Т

СI hope so,Т the Knight said doubtfully: Сbut you didnТt cry so much as I thought you would.Т

So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly away into the forest. СIt wonТt take long to see him off, I expect,Т Alice said to herself, as she stood watching him. СThere he goes! Right on his head as usual! However, he gets on again pretty easily Ц that comes of having so many things hung round the horse ЦТ So she went on talking to herself, as she watched the horse walking leisurely along the road, and the Knight tumbling off, first on one side and then on the other. After the fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved her handkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight.

СI hope it encouraged him,Т she said, as he turned to run down the hill: Сand now for the last brook, and to be a Queen! How grand it sounds!Т A very few steps brought her to the edge of the brook. СThe Eighth Square at last!Т she cried as she bounded across,


* * *

and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, with little flowerbeds dotted about it here and there. СOh, how glad I am to get here! And what is this on my head?Т she exclaimed in a tone of dismay, as she put her hands up to something very heavy, that fitted tight all round her head.

СBut how can it have got there without my knowing it?Т she said to herself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her lap to make out what it could possibly be.

It was a golden crown.




Chapter IX

Queen Alice


СWell, this is grand!Т said Alice. СI never expected I should be a Queen so soon Ц and IТll tell you what it is, your Majesty,Т she went on in a severe tone (she was always rather fond of scolding herself), СitТll never do for you to be lolling about on the grass like that! Queens have to be dignified, you know!Т

So she got up and walked about Ц rather stiffly just at first, as she was afraid that the crown might come off: but she comforted herself with the thought that there was nobody to see her, Сand if I really am a Queen,Т she said as she sat down again, СI shall be able to manage it quite well in time.Т

Everything was happening so oddly that she didnТt feel a bit surprised at finding the Red Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her, one on each side: she would have liked very much to ask them how they came there, but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there would be no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was over. СPlease, would you tell me ЦТ she began, looking timidly at the Red Queen.

СSpeak when youТre spoken to!Т[92 - Ђ√оворить, только когда к тебе обращаютс€ї, было незыблемым правилом детей ¬икторианской эпохи.] The Queen sharply interrupted her.

СBut if everybody obeyed that rule,Т said Alice, who was always ready for a little argument, Сand if you only spoke when you were spoken to, and the other person always waited for you to begin, you see nobody would ever say anything, so that ЦТ

СRidiculous!Т cried the Queen. СWhy, donТt you see, child ЦТ here she broke off with a frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenly changed the subject of the conversation. СWhat do you mean by УIf you really are a QueenФ? What right have you to call yourself so? You canТt be a Queen, you know, till youТve passed the proper examination. And the sooner we begin it, the better.Т

СI only said УifФ!Т poor Alice pleaded in a piteous tone.

The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red Queen remarked, with a little shudder, СShe says she only said УifФ ЦТ

СBut she said a great deal more than that!Т the White Queen moaned, wringing her hands. СOh, ever so much more than that!Т

СSo you did, you know,Т the Red Queen said to Alice. СAlways speak the truth Ц think before you speak Ц and write it down afterwards.Т

СIТm sure I didnТt mean ЦТ Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen interrupted her impatiently.

СThatТs just what I complain of! You should have meant! What do you suppose is the use of child without any meaning? Even a joke should have some meaning Ц and a childТs more important than a joke, I hope. You couldnТt deny that, even if you tried with both hands.Т

СI donТt deny things with my hands,Т Alice objected.

СNobody said you did,Т said the Red Queen. СI said you couldnТt if you tried.Т

СSheТs in that state of mind,Т said the White Queen, Сthat she wants to deny something Ц only she doesnТt know what to deny!Т

СA nasty, vicious temper,Т the Red Queen remarked; and then there was an uncomfortable silence for a minute or two.

The Red Queen broke the silence by saying to the White Queen, СI invite you to AliceТs dinnerparty this afternoon.Т

The White Queen smiled feebly, and said СAnd I invite you.Т

СI didnТt know I was to have a party at all,Т said Alice; Сbut if there is to be one, I think I ought to invite the guests.Т

СWe gave you the opportunity of doing it,Т the Red Queen remarked: Сbut I daresay youТve not had many lessons in manners yet?Т

СManners are not taught in lessons,Т said Alice. СLessons teach you to do sums, and things of that sort.Т

СAnd you do Addition?Т the White Queen asked. СWhatТs one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one?Т

СI donТt know,Т said Alice. СI lost count.Т

СShe canТt do Addition,Т the Red Queen interrupted. СCan you do Subtraction? Take nine from eight.Т

СNine from eight I canТt, you know,Т Alice replied very readily: Сbut ЦТ

СShe canТt do Subtraction,Т said the White Queen. СCan you do Division? Divide a loaf by a knife Ц whatТs the answer to that?Т

СI suppose ЦТ Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen answered for her. СBreadandbutter, of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bone from a dog: what remains?Т

Alice considered. СThe bone wouldnТt remain, of course, if I took it Ц and the dog wouldnТt remain; it would come to bite me Ц and IТm sure I shouldnТt remain!Т

СThen you think nothing would remain?Т said the Red Queen.

СI think thatТs the answer.Т

СWrong, as usual,Т said the Red Queen: Сthe dogТs temper would remain.Т

СBut I donТt see how ЦТ

СWhy, look here!Т the Red Queen cried. СThe dog would lose its temper, wouldnТt it?Т

СPerhaps it would,Т Alice replied cautiously.

СThen if the dog went away, its temper would remain!Т the Queen exclaimed triumphantly.

Alice said, as gravely as she could, СThey might go different ways.Т But she couldnТt help thinking to herself СWhat dreadful nonsense we are talking!Т

СShe canТt do sums a bit!Т the Queens said together, with great emphasis.

СCan you do sums?Т Alice said, turning suddenly on the White Queen, for she didnТt like being found fault with so much.

The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. СI can do Addition,Т she said, Сif you give me time Ц but I can do Subtraction, under any circumstances!Т

СOf course you know your ABC?Т said the Red Queen.

СTo be sure I do.Т said Alice.

СSo do I,Т the White Queen whispered: СweТll often say it over together, dear. And IТll tell you a secret Ц I can read words of one letter! IsnТt that grand! However, donТt be discouraged. YouТll come to it in time.Т

Here the Red Queen began again. СCan you answer useful questions?Т she said. СHow is bread made?Т

СI know that!Т Alice cried eagerly. СYou take some flour ЦТ

СWhere do you pick the flower?Т the White Queen asked. СIn a garden, or in the hedges?Т

		СWell, it isnТt picked at all,Т Alice explained: СitТs ground ЦТ

СHow many acres of ground?Т said the White Queen. СYou mustnТt leave out so many things.Т

СFan her head!Т the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. СSheТll be feverish after so much thinking.Т So they set to work and fanned her with bunches of leaves, till she had to beg them to leave off, it blew her hair about so.

СSheТs all right again now,Т said the Red Queen. СDo you know Languages? WhatТs the French for fiddlededee?Т

СFiddlededeeТs not English,Т Alice replied gravely.

СWho ever said it was?Т said the Red Queen.

Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty this time. СIf youТll tell me what language УfiddlededeeФ is, IТll tell you the French for it!Т she exclaimed triumphantly.

But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said СQueens never make bargains.Т

СI wish Queens never asked questions,Т Alice thought to herself.

СDonТt let us quarrel,Т the White Queen said in an anxious tone. СWhat is the cause of lightning?Т

СThe cause of lightning,Т Alice said very decidedly, for she felt quite certain about this, Сis the thunder Ц no, no!Т she hastily corrected herself. СI meant the other way.Т

СItТs too late to correct it,Т said the Red Queen: Сwhen youТve once said a thing, that fixes it, and you must take the consequences.Т

СWhich reminds me ЦТ the White Queen said, looking down and nervously clasping and unclasping her hands, Сwe had such a thunderstorm last Tuesday Ц I mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.Т

Alice was puzzled. СIn our country,Т she remarked, СthereТs only one day at a time.Т

The Red Queen said, СThatТs a poor thin way of doing things. Now here, we mostly have days and nights two or three at a time, and sometimes in the winter we take as many as five nights together Ц for warmth, you know.Т

СAre five nights warmer than one night, then?Т Alice ventured to ask.

СFive times as warm, of course.Т

СBut they should be five times as cold, by the same rule ЦТ

СJust so!Т cried the Red Queen. СFive times as warm, and five times as cold Ц just as IТm five times as rich as you are, and five times as clever!Т

Alice sighed and gave it up. СItТs exactly like a riddle with no answer!Т she thought.

СHumpty Dumpty saw it too,Т the White Queen went on in a low voice, more as if she were talking to herself. СHe came to the door with a corkscrew in his hand ЦТ

СWhat did he want?Т said the Red Queen.

СHe said he would come in,Т the White Queen went on, Сbecause he was looking for a hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there wasnТt such a thing in the house, that morning.Т

СIs there generally?Т Alice asked in an astonished tone.

СWell, only on Thursdays,Т said the Queen.

СI know what he came for,Т said Alice: Сhe wanted to punish the fish, because ЦТ

Here the White Queen began again. СIt was such a thunderstorm, you canТt think!Т (She never could, you know,Т said the Red Queen.) СAnd part of the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in Ц and it went rolling round the room in great lumps Ц and knocking over the tables and things Ц till I was so frightened, I couldnТt remember my own name!Т

Alice thought to herself СI never should try to remember my name in the middle of an accident! Where would be the use of it?Т but she did not say this aloud, for fear of hurting the poor QueenТs feeling.

СYour Majesty must excuse her,Т the Red Queen said to Alice, taking one of the White QueenТs hands in her own, and gently stroking it: Сshe means well, but she canТt help saying foolish things, as a general rule.Т

The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she ought to say something kind, but really couldnТt think of anything at the moment.

СShe never was really well brought up,Т the Red Queen went on: Сbut itТs amazing how goodtempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see how pleased sheТll be!Т But this was more than Alice had courage to do.

СA little kindness Ц and putting her hair in papers Ц would do wonders with her ЦТ

The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head on AliceТs shoulder. СI am so sleepy!Т she moaned.

СSheТs tired, poor thing!Т said the Red Queen. СSmooth her hair Ц lend her your nightcap Ц and sing her a soothing lullaby.Т

СI havenТt got a nightcap with me,Т said Alice, as she tried to obey the first direction: Сand I donТt know any soothing lullabies.Т

СI must do it myself, then,Т said the Red Queen, and she began: Ц

		СHushaby lady, in AliceТs lap!
		Till the feastТs ready, weТve time for a nap.
		When the feastТs over, weТll go to the ball Ц
		Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!

СAnd now you know the words,Т she added, as she put her head down on AliceТs other shoulder, Сjust sing it through to me. IТm getting sleepy, too.Т In another moment both Queens were fast asleep, and snoring loud.

СWhat am I to do? exclaimed Alice, looking about in great perplexity, as first one round head, and then the other, rolled down from her shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump in her lap. СI donТt think it ever happened before, that any one had to take care of two Queens asleep at once! No, not in all the History of England Ц it couldnТt, you know, because there never was more than one Queen at a time. Do wake up, you heavy things!Т she went on in an impatient tone; but there was no answer but a gentle snoring.

The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sounded more like a tune: at last she could even make out words, and she listened so eagerly that, when the two great heads vanished from her lap, she hardly missed them.

She was standing before an arched doorway over which were the words СQUEEN ALICEТ in large letters, and on each side of the arch there was a bellhandle; one was marked СVisitorsТ Bell,Т and the other СServantsТ Bell.Т[93 - ¬ викторианской Ѕритании существовала жестка€ иерархи€, и каждый, кто приходил в дом, точно знал, в какую дверь ему стучать или звонить. „ерный ход был дл€ прислуги, торговцев и т.д., а парадный Ц дл€ посетителей.]

СIТll wait till the songТs over,Т thought Alice, Сand then IТll ring Ц the Ц which bell must I ring?Т she went on, very much puzzled by the names. СIТm not a visitor, and IТm not a servant. There ought to be one marked УQueen,Ф you know ЦТ

Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature with a long beak put its head out for a moment and said СNo admittance till the week after next!Т and shut the door again with a bang.

Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time; but at last, a very old Frog, who was sitting under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towards her: he was dressed in bright yellow, and had enormous boots on.

СWhat is it, now?Т the Frog said in a deep hoarse whisper.

Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. СWhereТs the servant whose business it is to answer the door?Т she began angrily.

СWhich door?Т said the Frog.

Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl in which he spoke. СThis door, of course!Т

The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes for a minute: then he went nearer and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were trying whether the paint would come off: then he looked at Alice.

СTo answer the door?Т he said. СWhatТs it been asking of?Т He was so hoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him.

СI donТt know what you mean,Т she said.

СI speaks English, doesnТt I?Т the Frog went on. СOr are you deaf? What did it ask you?Т

СNothing!Т Alice said impatiently. СIТve been knocking at it!Т

СShouldnТt do that Ц shouldnТt do that ЦТ the Frog muttered. СWexes it, you know.Т Then he went up and gave the door a kick with one of his great feet. СYou let it alone,Т he panted out, as he hobbled back to his tree, Сand itТll let you alone, you know.Т

At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill voice was heard singing: Ц

		СTo the LookingGlass world it was Alice that said,[94 - To the LookingGlass world it was Alice that saidЕ Ц это пароди€ на стихотворение ¬альтера —котта Ђ расавчик ƒандиї (1825), посв€щенное герою €кобитских войн ƒжону √рэхему  лэверхаузу, первому виконту ƒанди.]
		СIТve a sceptre in hand, IТve a crown on my head.
		Let the LookingGlass creatures, whatever they b,
		Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me.ТС

And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus: Ц

		СThen fill up the glasses as quick as you can,
		And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran
		Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea Ц
		And welcome Queen Alice with thirtytimesthree!Т

Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice thought to herself, СThirty times three makes ninety. I wonder if any oneТs counting?Т In a minute there was silence again, and the same shrill voice sang another verse: Ц

		СУO LookingGlass creaturesФ quoth Alice, Уdraw near!
		СTis and honour to see me, a favour to hear:
		СTis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
		Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!ФТ

Then came the chorus again: Ц

		СThen fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,
		Or anything else that is pleasant to drink:
		Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine Ц
		And welcome Queen Alice with ninetytimesnine!Т

СNinety times nine!Т Alice repeated in despair, СOh, thatТll never be done! IТd better go in at once ЦТ and in she went, and there was a dead silence the moment she appeared.

Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked up the large hall, and noticed that there were about fifty quests, of all kinds: some were animals, some birds, and there were even a few flowers among them. СIТm glad theyТve come without waiting to be asked,Т she thought: СI should never have known who were the right people to invite!Т

There were three chairs at the head of the table: the Red and White Queens had already taken two of them, but the middle one was empty. Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfortable in the silence, and longing for some one to speak.

At last the Red Queen began. СYouТve missed the soup and fish,Т[95 - Ќа обедах блюда подавались в определенной последовательности: закуски (если были), суп, рыба, дичь, жаркое и десерт. јлиса пропустила первую половину обеда.] she said. СPut on the joint!Т And the waiters set a leg of mutton before Alice, who looked at it rather anxiously, as she had never had to carve a joint before.

СYou look a little shy; let me introduce you to that leg of mutton,Т said the Red Queen. СAlice Ц Mutton; Mutton Ц Alice.Т The leg of mutton got up in the dish and made a little bow to Alice; and Alice returned the bow, not knowing whether to be frightened or amused.

СMay I give you a slice?Т she said, taking up the knife and fork, and looking from one Queen to the other.

СCertainly not,Т the Red Queen, very decidedly: Сit isnТt etiquette to cut any one youТve been introduced to. Remove the joint!Т And the waiters carried it off, and brought a large plumpudding in its place.

СI wonТt be introduced to the pudding, please,Т Alice said rather hastily, Сor shall we get no dinner at all. May I give you some?Т

But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled СPudding Ц Alice; Alice Ц Pudding. Remove the pudding!Т and the waiters took it away so quickly that Alice couldnТt return its bow.

However, she didnТt see why the Red Queen should be the only one to give orders; so, as an experiment, she called out СWaiter! Bring back the pudding!Т and there it was again in a moment like a conjuringtrick. It was so large that she couldnТt help feeling a little shy with it, as she had been with the mutton: however, she conquered her shyness by a great effort and cut a slice and handed it to the Red Queen.

СWhat impertinence!Т said the Pudding. СI wonder how youТd like it, if I were to cut a slice out of you, you creature!Т

It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadnТt a word to say in reply: she could only sit and look at it and gasp.

СMake a remark,Т said the Red Queen: СitТs ridiculous to leave all the conversation to the pudding!Т

СDo you know, IТve had such a quantity of poetry repeated to me today,Т Alice began, a little frightened at finding that, the moment she opened her lips, there was dead silence, and all eyes were fixed upon her; Сand itТs a very curious thing, I think Ц every poem was about fishes in some way. Do you know why theyТre so fond of fishes, all about here?Т

She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little wide of the mark. СAs to fishes,Т she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her mouth close to AliceТs ear, Сher White Majesty knows a lovely riddle Ц all in poetry Ц all about fishes. Shall she repeat it?Т

СHer Red MajestyТs very kind to mention it,Т the White Queen murmured into AliceТs other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon. СIt would be such a treat! May I?Т

СPlease do,Т Alice said very politely.

The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked AliceТs cheek. Then she began:

		СУFirst, the fish must be caught.Ф[96 - Ёто не просто очередное стихотворение о рыбе: любители Ћьюиса  эрролла вычислили, что разгадка Ц устрица!]
		That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.
		УNext, the fish must be bought.Ф
		That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.

		УNow cook me the fish!Ф
		That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.
		УLet it lie in a dish!Ф
		That is easy, because it already is in it.

		УBring it here! Let me sup!Ф
		It is easy to set such a dish on the table.
		УTake the dishcover up!Ф
		Ah, that is so hard that I fear IТm unable!

		For it holds it like glue Ц
		Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:
		Which is easiest to do,
		Undishcover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?Т

СTake a minute to think about it, and then guess,Т said the Red Queen. СMeanwhile, weТll drink your health Ц Queen AliceТs health!Т she screamed at the top of her voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly, and very queerly they managed it: some of them put their glasses upon their heads like extinguishers[97 - Extinguisher Ц металлический колпачок на длинной ручке, с помощью которого гасили свечи. ¬ современном €зыке extinguisher означает огнетушитель.], and drank all that trickled down their faces Ц others upset the decanters[98 - Decanters Ц винные графины.], and drank the wine as it ran off the edges of the table Ц and three of them (who looked like kangaroos) scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly lapping up the gravy, Сjust like pigs in a trough!Т thought Alice.

СYou ought to return thanks in a neat speech,Т the Red Queen said, frowning at Alice as she spoke.

СWe must support you, you know,Т the White Queen whispered, as Alice got up to do it, very obediently, but a little frightened.

СThank you very much,Т she whispered in reply, Сbut I can do quite well without.Т

СThat wouldnТt be at all the thing,Т the Red Queen said very decidedly: so Alice tried to submit to it with a good grace.

(СAnd they did push so!Т she said afterwards, when she was telling her sister the history of the feast. СYou would have thought they wanted to squeeze me flat!Т)

In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place while she made her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, one on each side, that they nearly lifted her up into the air: СI rise to return thanks ЦТ Alice began: and she really did rise as she spoke, several inches; but she got hold of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herself down again.

СTake care of yourself!Т screamed the White Queen, seizing AliceТs hair with both her hands. СSomethingТs going to happen!Т

And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of thing happened in a moment. The candles all grew up to the ceiling, looking something like a bed of rushes with fireworks at the top. As to the bottles, they each took a pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on as wings, and so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in all directions: Сand very like birds they look,Т Alice thought to herself, as well as she could in the dreadful confusion that was beginning.

At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, and turn to see what was the matter with the White Queen; but, instead of the Queen, there was the leg of mutton sitting in the chair. СHere I am!Т cried a voice from the soup tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time to see the QueenТs broad goodnatured face grinning at her for a moment over the edge of the tureen, before she disappeared into the soup.

There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of the guests were lying down in the dishes, and the soup ladle was walking up the table towards AliceТs chair, and beckoning to her impatiently to get out of its way.

СI canТt stand this any longer!Т she cried, as she jumped up and seized the tablecloth with both hands: one good pull, and plates, dishes, guests, and candles came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.

СAnd as for you,Т she went on, turning fiercely upon the Red Queen, whom she considered as the cause of all the mischief Ц but the Queen was no longer at her side Ц she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of a little doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round and round after her own shawl, which was trailing behind her.

At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at this, but she was far too much excited to be surprised at anything now. СAs for you,Т she repeated, catching hold of the little creature in the very act of jumping over a bottle which had just lighted upon the table, СIТll shake you into a kitten, that I will!Т




Chapter X

Shaking


She took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her backwards and forwards with all her might.

The Red Queen made no resistance whatever: only her face grew very small, and her eyes got large and green: and still, as Alice went on shaking her, she kept on growing shorter Ц and fatter Ц and softer Ц and rounder Ц and Ц




Chapter XI

Waking


Ц†and it really was a kitten, after all.




Chapter XII

Which Dreamed It?


СYour Red Majesty shouldnТt purr so loud,Т Alice said, rubbing her eyes, and addressing the kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity. СYou woke me out of oh! such a nice dream! And youТve been along with me, Kitty Ц all through the LookingGlass world. Did you know it, dear?Т

It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had once made the remark) that, whatever you say to them, they always purr. СIf they would only purr for УyesФ and mew for Уno,Ф or any rule of that sort,Т she had said, Сso that one could keep up a conversation! But how can you talk with a person if they always say the same thing?Т

On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was impossible to guess whether it meant СyesТ or Сno.Т

So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till she had found the Red Queen: then she went down on her knees on the hearthrug, and put the kitten and the Queen to look at each other. СNow, Kitty!Т she cried, clapping her hands triumphantly. СConfess that was what you turned into!Т

(СBut it wouldnТt look at it,Т she said, when she was explaining the thing afterwards to her sister: Сit turned away its head, and pretended not to see it: but it looked a little ashamed of itself, so I think it must have been the Red Queen.Т)

СSit up a little more stiffly, dear!Т Alice cried with a merry laugh. СAnd curtsey while youТre thinking what to Ц what to purr. It saves time, remember!Т And she caught it up and gave it one little kiss, Сjust in honour of having been a Red Queen.Т

СSnowdrop, my pet!Т she went on, looking over her shoulder at the White Kitten, which was still patiently undergoing its toilet, Сwhen will Dinah have finished with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be the reason you were so untidy in my dream Ц Dinah! do you know that youТre scrubbing a White Queen? Really, itТs most disrespectful of you!

СAnd what did Dinah turn to, I wonder?Т she prattled on, as she settled comfortably down, with one elbow in the rug, and her chin in her hand, to watch the kittens. СTell me, Dinah, did you turn to Humpty Dumpty? I think you did Ц however, youТd better not mention it to your friends just yet, for IТm not sure.

СBy the way, Kitty, if only youТd been really with me in my dream, there was one thing you would have enjoyed Ц I had such a quantity of poetry said to me, all about fishes! Tomorrow morning you shall have a real treat. All the time youТre eating your breakfast, IТll repeat УThe Walrus and the CarpenterФ to you; and then you can make believe itТs oysters, dear!

СNow, Kitty, letТs consider who it was that dreamed it all. This is a serious question, my dear, and you should not go on licking your paw like that Ц as if Dinah hadnТt washed you this morning! You see, Kitty, it must have been either me or the Red King. He was part of my dream, of course Ц but then I was part of his dream, too! Was it the Red King, Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, so you ought to know Ц Ц Oh, Kitty, do help to settle it! IТm sure your paw can wait!Т But the provoking kitten only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadnТt heard the question.

Which do you think it was?

		A boat beneath a sunny sky,[99 - A boat beneath a sunny sky Ц это акростих: первые буквы строк складываютс€ в им€ јлисы Ц Alice Pleasance Liddell.]
		Lingering onward dreamily
		In an evening of July Ц

		Children three that nestle near,
		Eager eye and willing ear,
		Pleased a simple tale to hear Ц

		Long had paled that sunny sky:
		Echoes fade and memories die:
		Autumn frosts have slain July.

		Still she haunts me, phantomwise,
		Alice moving under skies
		Never seen by waking eyes.

		Children yet, the tale to hear,
		Eager eye and willing ear,
		Lovingly shall nestle near.

		In a Wonderland they lie,
		Dreaming as the days go by,
		Dreaming as the summers die:

		Ever drifting down the stream Ц
		Lingering in the golden gleam Ц
		Life, what is it but a dream?




English-Russian Vocabulary



a adjective прилагательное

adv adverb наречие

cj conjunction союз

int interjection междометие

n noun существительное

num numeral числительное

past past tense прошедшее врем€

ph v phrasal verb фразовый глагол

pl plural множественное число

pron pronoun местоимение

p.p. past participle причастие прошедшего времени

prep preposition предлог

pr.p. present participle причастие насто€щего времени

v verb глагол




A


abide Ц v терпеть, выносить; canТt abide smth не выносить чегол.

absence Ц n отсутствие

account Ц n отчет, рассказ; account for быть причиной

accusation Ц n обвинение

accustomed Ц a привыкший

adjourn Ц v прервать (суд, собрание и т.д.)

alas Ц adv увы

archbishop Ц n архиепископ

argument Ц n спор

arrow Ц n стрела

askance Ц adv искоса

asunder Ц adv врозь

at any rate в любом случае

attend (to) Ц v обращать внимание

awe Ц n благоговейный трепет

axe Ц n топор

axis Ц n ось




B


badger Ц n барсук

bake Ц n печь, запекать

bale Ц n зло, разрушающа€ сила

bargain Ц n торг, сделка; v торговатьс€

bark Ц n лай; кора; v ла€ть

barley Ц n €чмень

bawl out v выкрикивать

beak Ц n клюв

beat Ц (beat, beaten) v бить; beat time отбивать ритм

beckon Ц v приказать жестом

billow Ц n лет€щее по небу облако, пар и т.д.

biscuit Ц n печенье

blacking Ц n вакса, гуталин

blotting paper n промокашка

boast Ц n хвастовство; v хвастатьс€

boon Ц n дар, благоде€ние

border Ц n бордюр

bough Ц n сук

bound Ц n прыжок; v прыгать

box oneТs ears надрать комул. уши

bran Ц n отруби

bridle Ц n уздечка

broil Ц v жарить на открытом огне

brook Ц n ручей

bud Ц n бутон

buttercup Ц n лютик




C


cackle Ц v громко (и непри€тно) сме€тьс€

camomile Ц n ромашка

caper Ц v скакать и прыгать от счасть€

capital Ц a великолепный (уст.)

carpenter Ц n плотник

carriage Ц n вагон; экипаж

carve Ц v резать

castle Ц n з&#225;мок; ладь€ (шахм.)

caterpillar Ц n гусеница

cauldron Ц n котел

charge Ц n атака; v нападать

chime Ц n колокольный звон, бой часов

chimney Ц n дымоход

chimneypiece Ц n каминна€ полка

choke Ц v давитьс€

chop Ц v рубить

chrysalis Ц n куколка (у насекомых)

cinder Ц n пепел, зола

civil Ц a вежливый

claw Ц n коготь

club Ц n дубинка

clubs Ц n pl крестова€ масть (в картах)

coax Ц v уговаривать, улещивать, говорить вкрадчиво

comfort Ц n утешение; v утешать

comparison Ц n сравнение

conclusion Ц n заключение, вывод

condemn Ц v осудить (юр.)

conduct Ц n поведение

consequence Ц n последствие

contemptuously Ц adv презрительно

contradict Ц v противоречить, возражать

contratiwise Ц adv наоборот

convenient Ц a легкий, удобный

corkscrew Ц n штопор

counter Ц n стойка, прилавок

course Ц n перемена блюд; дорога

cravat Ц n шейный платок

cream Ц n сливки

crimson Ц a малиновый

cross Ц a строптивый, раздраженный; v скрестить

crust Ц n корка

curl Ц v завиватьс€

curtsey Ц n книксен; v делать книксен

custard Ц n заварной крем

custody Ц n содержание под стражей




D


dahlia Ц n георгин

daisy Ц n маргаритка

daresay Ц v по моему мнению, € бы сказал(а)

deaf Ц a глухой

demurely Ц adv скромно

diamond Ц n бриллиант

diamonds Ц n pl бубнова€ масть (в картах)

diligently Ц adv прилежно

dodge Ц v увернутьс€

dormouse Ц n сон€

doubt Ц n сомнение; v сомневатьс€

dragonfly Ц n стрекоза

disagree Ц v не согласитьс€; вызвать расстройство желудка

draggled Ц a мокрый и гр€зный; неопр€тно свисающий

drawl Ц n манера раст€гивать гласные

drip Ц v капать

dripping Ц a насквозь промокший

dunce Ц n тугодум

dust Ц v смахнуть пыль

dwindle Ц v уменьшатьс€




E


eel Ц n угорь

embroider Ц v вышивать

entangle Ц v (за)путать(с€)

evidence Ц n улика; свидетельские показани€

execute Ц v казнить

exhausted Ц a измотанный




F


fade Ц v ув€дать

fan Ц n веер; v обмахивать(с€)

fancy Ц n симпати€; каприз, прихоть; v любить; воображать

fast Ц a, adv быстрый, быстро; крепкий, крепко

fawn Ц n олень (молода€ особь)

feast Ц n пир; v пировать

fender Ц n каминна€ решетка

ferret Ц n хорек

fiddlestick(s) Ц int чушь, глупости

fidget Ц v ерзать

fit Ц n припадок; v подходить (по форме, размеру и т.д.)

flapper Ц n ласт

flat Ц a плашм€

flurry Ц n вспышка чувств, активности и т.д.

flustered Ц a в см€тении

flutter Ц v взмахивать крыль€ми

footman Ц n лакей

forehead Ц n лоб

fret Ц v посто€нно волноватьс€ (о)

frown Ц v хмуритьс€

frying pan n сковорода

furrow Ц n борозда




G


game Ц n дичь

giddy Ц a испытывающий дурноту

gimlet Ц n буравчик

gloomily Ц adv мрачно

grasshopper Ц n кузнечик

grave Ц a серьезный

gravy Ц n м€сна€ подливка

graze Ц v оцарапать, ободрать (кожу)

groan Ц n стон; v стонать

growl Ц n ворчание, рычание; v ворчать, рычать

grumble Ц v ворчать, жаловатьс€

grunt Ц v хрюкать

guineapig Ц n морска€ свинка




H


haddock Ц n пикша

handwriting Ц n почерк

hastily Ц adv поспешно

hatch (eggs) Ц v высиживать (€йца)

hearken Ц = listen (уст.)

hearts Ц n pl червонна€ масть (в картах)

heather Ц n вереск

hedge Ц n ограда, изгородь

hedgehog Ц n еж

helmet Ц n шлем

hint Ц n намек; v намекать

hoarse Ц a хриплый

hobble Ц v ковыл€ть

holly Ц n остролист

horsefly Ц n слепень

hookah Ц n каль€н

housemaid Ц n горнична€




I


ignorant Ц a невежественный

impertinence Ц n наглость

in vain тщетно

incessantly Ц adv посто€нно, бесконечно

indignantly Ц adv возмущенно

injure Ц v ранить, травмировать

insolence Ц n наглость

interrupt Ц v перебивать




J


jackinthebox Ц n чертик в табакерке

jaw Ц n челюсть

jog Ц v толкнуть (локтем)

joint Ц n сустав, крепление

jury Ц n прис€жные




K


kid Ц a лайковый

knave Ц n валет

kneel Ц v опуститьс€ на колени

knight Ц n рыцарь; офицер (шахм.)

knoll Ц n холм

knot Ц n узел

knuckle Ц n кост€шка




L


ladder Ц n стрем€нка; приставна€ лестница

ladle Ц n половник

languid Ц a томный, ленивый

lap (up) Ц v лакать

latitude Ц n широта

leap Ц n прыжок

leave off ph v прекратить, оставить

ledge Ц n выступ

lest Ц conj как бы не, чтобы не

limb Ц n конечность (рука, нога)

linger (on) Ц v медлить, задерживатьс€

live on питатьс€ чемл.

lizard Ц n €щерица

longitude Ц n долгота

loose Ц a свободно болтающийс€, расшатавшийс€

lullaby Ц n колыбельна€

lump Ц n комок, кусок




M


magpie Ц n сорока

mallet Ц n крокетный молоток

melancholy Ц a печальный

mine Ц n шахта

mischief Ц n озорство

moan Ц n стон; v стонать

mournfully Ц adv скорбно, траурно

mustard Ц n горчица

mutter Ц v бормотать

mutton Ц n баранина




N


narrow escape спасение в последний момент

nibble Ц v откусывать маленькими кусочками

nonsense Ц n чушь, бессмыслица




O


oar Ц n весло

obediently Ц adv послушно

obey Ц v слушатьс€

oblong Ц a продолговатый

offend Ц v оскорбить

ointment Ц n мазь

on second thoughts по размышлении

oyster Ц n устрица




P


pant Ц v пыхтеть, задыхатьс€

parchment Ц n пергамент

particular Ц a придирчивый; in particular конкретно, в отдельности

passage Ц n коридор

passion Ц n страсть; гнев

pat Ц v похлопывать

pattern Ц n образец, модель, узор

pawn Ц n пешка

pebble Ц n галька

peg Ц n колышек

perplexity Ц n замешательство

petal Ц n лепесток

pigeon Ц n голубь

pin Ц n булавка; v прикалывать

pinch Ц v щипать

plead Ц v взмолитьс€, умол€ть

pluck Ц v срывать; выщипывать

ply Ц v двигать(с€) по маршруту

poison Ц n €д; v отравить

poker Ц n кочерга

ponder Ц v размышл€ть

porcupine Ц n дикобраз

porpoise Ц n дельфин, морска€ свинь€

powdered Ц a пудреный

prattle Ц v болтать (о пуст€ках)

pretend Ц v притвор€тьс€

pretext Ц n предлог, повод

prick Ц v уколоть, проколоть

prosecute Ц v преследовать в судебном пор€дке

provoking Ц a раздражающий, выматывающий

put down ph v записывать

puzzle Ц n загадка; v озадачивать




Q


quench Ц v утолить (жажду)

quiver Ц v дрожать, тр€стись




R


ramble Ц v брести, гул€ть

rather Ц adv довольнотаки; rather than скорее чем; IТd/youТd rather € бы предпочел/вам бы лучшеЕ

raven Ц n ворон

raving Ц a совершенно, абсолютно

reduce Ц v уступить (о цене и т.д.)

rejoice (in) Ц v радоватьс€ (чемул.)

remedy Ц n средство, лекарство

reproof Ц n упрек, обвинение

resolutely Ц adv решительно

rest Ц v отдыхать; the rest (of) остальные, остаток

retort Ц v огрызнутьс€, сердито ответить

riddle Ц n загадка

ridge Ц n хребет, гребень

rill Ц n ручей

room Ц n место, пространство

root Ц n корень

row Ц n р€д; v грести

rumble Ц v грохотать

rush Ц n спешка, рывок; камыш; v бросатьс€, спешить




S


sage Ц n мудрый старец

salmon Ц n лосось

sap Ц n сок (растений)

saucepan Ц n кастрюл€

saucer Ц n блюдце

saunter Ц v неспешно прогуливатьс€

save Ц v спасать; экономить; prep кроме

sawdust Ц n опилки

scarcely Ц adv едва ли

scold Ц v отчитывать

scramble Ц v карабкатьс€; n лихорадочна€ борьба (за)

seal Ц n тюлень

sensation Ц n ощущение

sentence Ц n предложение (грамм.); приговор

serpent Ц n зме€

set about (smth) ph v приступать, братьс€ за

shrimp Ц n креветка

shrink Ц (shrank, shrunk) v съежитьс€, уменьшитьс€

sieve Ц n решето

skim Ц v лететь плоско, плашм€ (обычно о камн€х, пускаемых по воде)

slate Ц n черепица; грифельна€ доска

slippery Ц a скользкий

sluggard Ц n лент€й

snail Ц n улитка

snappishly Ц adv резко, раздраженно

snatch Ц n хватающее движение; v хватать

sneeze Ц n чихание; v чихать

snore Ц v храпеть

snort Ц v фыркать; храпеть

snout Ц n рыло, выступающа€ часть морды (у животных)

snug Ц a уютно; плотно

sob Ц n всхлип, рыдание; v всхлипывать

sole Ц n подошва

somersault Ц n сальто

soothing Ц a успокаивающий

spade Ц n лопата

spades Ц n pl пикова€ масть

spike Ц n шип

sprawl Ц v распластатьс€

squeeze Ц v протиснутьс€; выжимать

stalk Ц n стебель

stamp Ц v топать

stand down ph v покинуть место дл€ дачи свидетельских показаний

start Ц v вздрогнуть

sticky Ц a липкий

stocking Ц n чулок

stool Ц n табурет

stoop Ц v сутулитьс€

stroke Ц n гребок (веслами, руками); v гладить

stumble Ц v спотыкатьс€

subdue Ц v покор€ть, подавл€ть

submit Ц v покоритьс€

succeed Ц v удаватьс€, иметь успех

suet Ц n околопочечный жир, нутр€ное сало

sulkily Ц adv угрюмо

supple Ц a гибкий

suppress Ц v подавить

survey Ц n осмотр, разведка




T


tangled Ц a спутанный

temper Ц n (хорошее) расположение духа, самообладание; lose oneТs temper выходить из себ€

thatch Ц v крыть (крышу)

thimble Ц n наперсток

thirsty Ц a испытывающий жажду

thistle Ц n чертополох

thou = you (уст.)

thy Ц = your (уст.)

titter Ц v (нервно) хихикать

toil Ц n т€жкий труд; v т€жело работать

trample Ц v топтать

treacle Ц n патока

treat Ц n удовольствие

tremble Ц v дрожать

trial Ц n суд

trifle Ц n пуст€к

trot Ц v бежать рысцой

trough Ц n корыто

tumble Ц v падать (на землю)

tureen Ц n супница

twine Ц v оплетать(с€)




U


uncork Ц v откупорить

undertone Ц n намек; in an undertone негромко




V


velvet Ц n бархат

verse Ц n стихотворение

vanish Ц v исчезнуть

vinegar Ц n уксус

violet Ц n фиалка




W


wag oneТs tail вил€ть хвостом

waistcoat Ц n жилет

walrus Ц n морж

wander Ц v бродить

well Ц n колодец

whiskers Ц n pl бакенбарды; усы (у животных)

whistle Ц n свист; v свистеть

whiting Ц n мерлуза

wig Ц n парик

willow Ц n ива

wilt Ц = will (уст.)

wink Ц v подмигивать

withered Ц a засохший

witness Ц n свидетель

wonder Ц n удивление; v удивл€тьс€; I wonder интересно знать

worse Ц a, adv хуже; be worse off оказатьс€ в худшем положении (чем)

worsted Ц n пр€жа

wrap Ц v обернуть, обмотать

wreath Ц n венок

wriggle Ц v извиватьс€

wring Ц oneТs hands ломать руки




Y


yawn Ц v зевать

yet Ц adv еще, пока; conj и все же

yonder Ц adv там



notes


ѕримечани€





1


ѕо легенде, „арльз Ћютвидж ƒоджсон (более известный под псевдонимом Ћьюис  эрролл) сочинил историю о приключени€х јлисы в —тране чудес во врем€ катани€ на лодке с преподобным –обинсоном ƒакуортом и трем€ сестрами Ћидделл Ц Ћориной, јлисой и Ёдит. ¬последствии истори€ была немного изменена и опубликована.




2


ORANGE MARMALADE Ц мармелад Ц это варенье, приготовленное из цитрусовых (обычно из апельсинов).




3


Miles Ц мили, британские единицы измерени€ рассто€ни€. 1 мил€ = 1609 км.




4


Schoolroom Ц в ¬икторианскую эпоху дети получали основы образовани€ дома, занима€сь в классной комнате с гувернантками или гувернерами. «атем мальчики отправл€лись в школыпансионы, а девочки часто продолжали обучение дома.




5


Inch Ц дюйм, единица измерени€ длины. 1 дюйм Ц 2,54 см.




6


—urrants Ц сушеный виноград сорта Ђкоринкаї Ц мелкий, сладкий и без косточек. ≈го часто кладут в выпечку.




7


—uriouser Ц эта форма некорректна: так как слово curious состоит из более чем двух слогов, правильна€ сравнительна€ степень будет more curious. ¬озможно, использование такой формы Ц это кака€то шутка, известна€ в семействе Ћидделл. ј может быть, это Ђдетское словечкої Ц просто распространенна€ ошибка, которую делают дети.




8


Feet Ц мн.ч. от foot. 1 фут = 30 см.




9


Gallon = 4,55 литра.




10


Ёто математическа€ шутка: специалисты утверждают, что, продолжа€ последовательность, до двадцати јлиса действительно не доберетс€.




11


УHow doth the littleЦФ Ц это начало нравоучительного стихотворени€ дл€ детей »саака ”оттса (1674Ц1748), которое называетс€ Ђѕротив праздности и озорстваї.




12


Bathing machines Ц купальные машины: четырехколесные повозки, зат€нутые холстом. ѕереодеватьс€ в купальный костюм нужно было внутри, после чего лошади ввозили повозку в воду и разворачивали ее так, чтобы купальщика не было видно с берега. ѕосле этого можно было спуститьс€ в воду.




13


A mouse Ц of a mouse Ц to a mouse Ц a mouse Ц O mouse! Ц Ёто именительный, родительный, дательный, винительный и звательный падежи соответственно.




14


William the Conqueror Ц ¬ильгельм «авоеватель, первый норманнский король јнглии (1066Ц1078). ≈го победа в битве при √астингсе (1066) привела его к власти и дала начало нормандскому завоеванию јнглии.




15


O&#249; est ma chatte? Ц √де мо€ кошка? (фр.)




16


A Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet Ц список существ напоминает об участниках той лодочной прогулки, во врем€ которой была впервые рассказана истори€ об јлисе. Duck Ц это –обинсон ƒакуорт, Dodo Ц сам „арльз Ћютвидж ƒоджсон (который слегка заикалс€, в том числе произнос€ свое им€), а также сестры јлисы: Lory Ц Ћорина, и Eaglet Ц Ёдит.




17


William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope Ц это цитата из Ђ раткого курса историиї (автор Ц ’эвиленд де ћезюрье „епмелл). ¬еро€тно, по этой книге занимались девочки Ћидделл.




18


Caucusrace Ц caucus означает группу ответственных лиц Ц членов политической партии или собрани€ дл€ обсуждени€ и утверждени€ планов. ƒальнейшее описание отражает отношение автора к подобным видам де€тельности.




19


Comfits Ц засахаренные орехи и сухофрукты.




20


Digging for apples Ц Pat Ц сокращение от Patrick, а ѕатрик считаетс€ самым распространенным ирландским именем. Ђ»рландские €блокиї Ц неофициальное название картошки.




21


УYouТre old, Father WilliamФ Ц это перва€ строчка попул€рного детского стихотворени€ –оберта —аути (1744Ц1832), Ђ”тешени€ старика и как он их получилї.




22


Croquet Ц крокет, игра, в которую играют м€чами и молотками с длинными руко€тками. ћ€чи нужно направл€ть сквозь воротца/обручи/калитки.  рокет был попул€рен во второй половине XIX в., особенно в ¬икторианскую эпоху.




23


Cheshire cat Ц чеширский кот. ќбраз наве€н поговоркой Ђухмыл€етс€, как чеширский котї.  роме того, утверждают, что Ћьюис  эрролл видел изображение улыбающегос€ кота в церкви  рофтон“ис, где его отец служил ректором




24


 онечно, это пароди€, но в ¬икторианскую эпоху кухарка была одной из ключевых фигур в доме. ’оз€йка должна была вс€чески ублажать ее, потому что Ђв расстройствеї и Ђот нервовї та могла начать портить блюда. «десь кухарка €вно не в духе, и в супе полно перца.




25


СSpeak roughly to your little boyТ Ц это пароди€ на стихотворение Ђ√оворите м€гкої. ќдни источники указывают в качестве его автора ƒэвида Ѕейтса, другие Ц √.”. Ћэнгфорда.




26


Yards Ц €рды, британские единицы измерени€ рассто€ни€. 1 €рд = 0,91 см.




27


”стойчивые выражени€ mad as a hatter и mad as a March hare означают Ђсовершенно чокнутыйї. —читалось, что в марте зайцы ведут себ€ так же, как мартовские коты и кошки. ј использование ртути в изготовлении шл€п вызывало соответствующее отравление у шл€пников.




28


The fourth. Ц 4 ма€ Ц день рождени€ јлисы Ћидделл. ћес€ц упоминалс€ в предыдущей главе.




29


УTwinkle, twinkle, little bat!Ф Ц Ёто пароди€ на стихотворение ƒжейн “ейлор (1783Ц1824) Ђ«вездаї.




30


Elsie, Lacie and Tillie Ц здесь автор снова называет сестер Ћидделл, принимавших участие в лодочной прогулке. Elsie произноситс€ так же, как L.C. Ц инициалы старшей сестры, Ћорины Ўарлотты (Lorina Charlotte). Lacie Ц это анаграмма имени Alice. Tillie Ц сокращение от Matilda, а это было прозвище Ёдит.




31


Ёто вполне очевидна€ отсылка к войне јлой и белой розы, династической войне между Ћанкастерами и …орками, чьими символами были ала€ и бела€ роза соответственно.




32


A cat may look at a king Ц Ёта пословица означает, что, какой бы важной персоной человек ни был, на него все равно могут и будут смотреть те, чей статус ниже. »спользование пословиц и устойчивых выражений в буквальном смысле дл€ описани€ ситуации Ц один из характерных приемов британского юмора.




33


Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves Ц это вполне узнаваема€ пословица Take care of the pence and the pounds will take care of themselves. √ерцогин€ часто использует поговорки и поучительные высказывани€, хорошо известные викторианским читател€м.




34


Ђ‘альшивый черепаховый супї в действительности варили из тел€чьих головы, ножек с копытами и хвоста. ќн готовилс€ на гов€жьем бульоне с мадерой. ѕоэтому у нарисованного ƒжоном “енниелом персонажа тел€чь€ голова, копыта и хвост.




35


–ассказ геро€ полон таких шуток (основанных на созвучии различных слов). јвтор объ€сн€ет только часть из них.




36


УFrench, music, AND WASHING Ц extraФ Ц это строчка из поступившего из школы счета: некоторые услуги и предметы оплачивались отдельно (сверх установленной платы за обучение). ѕравда, Ђстиркаї относитс€ скорее к школеинтернату.




37


Reeling and Writhing, Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision Ц это школьные предметы: чтение и письмо (Reading and Writing) и арифметические операции: сложение, вычитание, умножение и деление (Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division).




38


Mystery, Seaography, Drawling, Stretching and Fainting in Coils Ц это также школьные предметы: истори€ (history), географи€ (geography), рисование (drawing), наброски (sketching) и живопись маслом (painting in oils).




39


Laughing and Grief = Latin and Greek.sss




40


Quadrille Ц это танец, состо€вший из определенной последовательности фигур и исполн€вшийс€ четырьм€ парами, выстроившимис€ квадратом.




41


СУWill you walk a little faster?Ф said a whiting to a snail Ц это сочинение наве€но стихотворением ћэри ’ауитт (1799Ц1888) Ђѕаук и мухаї.




42


Soles and eels Ц Ђкамбалы и угриї звучит почти так же, как soles and heels Ц Ђподошвы и каблукиї.




43


УТTis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declareФ Ц это пароди€ на стихотворение »саака ”оттса ЂЋент€йї.




44


СBeautiful Soup, so rich and greenТ Ц это пароди€ на песню Ђ¬ечерн€€ звездаї ƒжеймса ћ. —эйл€.




45


The Queen of hearts, she made some tartsЕ Ц Ёто не пароди€, а существующее детское стихотворение (автор неизвестен).




46


SheТs all my fancy painted him Ц пароди€ наве€на стихотворением ”иль€ма ћи ЂЁлис √рейї.




47


—ледующий день Ц это 5 но€бр€, то есть день √а€ ‘окса. √ай ‘окс был участником порохового заговора Ц неудавшейс€ попытки взорвать здание ѕарламента вместе с королем. 5 но€бр€ 1605 г. заговор был раскрыт.  аждый год этот день отмечают кострами и фейерверками.




48


For Wednesday week Ц букв. до среды через среду; зд.: после дождичка в четверг (в день, который никогда не наступит).




49


¬ викторианской Ѕритании огонь в спальн€х разводили только когда было действительно холодно. ¬ прохладную погоду самым теплым местом в доме была гостина€, в которой горел камин. ќднако считалось, что дет€м там делать нечего: им следовало проводить врем€ в детской, классной комнате и в саду.




50


Ѕелый рыцарь снова по€витс€ в √лаве 8. “ам читатель получит объ€снение его плохому равновесию.




51


¬ качестве источников вдохновени€ дл€ написани€ этого сочинени€ называют несколько стихотворений. ¬ любом случае это одно из лучших стихотворений литературы нонсенса. ќно так полюбилось читател€м, что Ћьюис  эрролл не раз упом€нул о нем в своей знаменитой поэме Ђќхота на —наркаї.




52


Ќекоторые слова из этого стихотворени€ объ€сн€ютс€ в √лаве 6. ќни складываютс€ из нескольких слов, так что о значении можно догадатьс€ по звучанию и написанию.




53


„асто утверждают, что под розой подразумеваетс€ младша€ сестра јлисы –ода.




54


»м€ ¬айолет носила сама€ младша€ сестра јлисы.




55


¬ ¬икторианскую эпоху даже дет€м полагалось говорить вежливо и разумно. ƒела€ книксен, можно было быстро обдумать ответ и подобрать нужные слова.




56


Proboscis Ц хобот (у насекомых и также слоновий хобот).




57


Operaglass(es) Ц театральный бинокль.




58


Gnat Ц разновидность комара.




59


Snapdragonfly Ц игра слов строитс€ на названии попул€рной рождественской игры snapdragon (львиный зев). »зюм спрыскивалс€ бренди и поджигалс€, а участники должны были выхватывать с блюда изюминки и есть их.




60


Frumenty and mincepie Ц и то и другое Ц традиционные рождественские блюда. Frumenty Ц это разновидность пудинга из пшеницы, молока, €иц и бульона с сахаром и специ€ми. Mincepies Ц это пирожки со сладкой начинкой из сухофруктов, нутр€ного сала, бренди и специй (мускатного ореха, корицы, гвоздики и т.д.)




61


L, I know it begins with L! Ц јлиса права: ее фамили€ Ћидделл.




62


Fingerposts Ц у традиционных английских указателей несколько Ђрукї (стрелок) с названи€ми населенных пунктов, которые наход€тс€ в указанном направлении.




63


Tweedledum and Tweedledee Ц это попул€рное британское детское стихотворение.




64


УHere we go round the mulberry bushФ Ц Ёта песенка используетс€ в игре: ее поют, кружась в хороводе.




65


Nightcap Ц ночные колпаки использовались в эпоху, когда спальни отапливались каминами.   утру температура в комнате падала, и колпак защищал голову от утреннего холода.




66


Ditto Ц точно, полностью согласен.




67


Bolster Ц длинна€ узка€ обычно кругла€ подушка.




68


LadyТs maid Ц горнична€ хоз€йки; занималась плать€ми и украшени€ми дамы, укладывала ей волосы, помогала одетьс€ и раздетьс€ (что в ¬икторианскую эпоху было не такто просто). ¬ иерархии слуг это была довольно высока€ должность.




69


Teetotum Ц разновидность волчка: обычно квадратный, с подписанными на боках буквами и цифрами.




70


Feather! Ц «десь подразумеваетс€ не птичье перо, а приказ развернуть весло плашм€.




71


Catching a crab Ц to catch a crab означает Ђне мочь выдернуть неудачно опущенное весло из воды или грести по воздухуї.




72


Goose Ц это относительно м€гко сформулированное Ђдурачок/дурочкаї.




73


ѕо легенде, в некоторых заведени€х, если посетитель заказывал одно вареное €йцо, ему подавали сразу два, так как одно неизбежно оказывалось несвежим.




74


Humpty Dumpty Ц это персонаж старинного детского стихотворени€. ќбычно его описывают как человека€йцо. ќдни исследователи предполагают, что образ был наве€н исторической личностью, другие утверждают, что так была названа огромна€ пушка. ѕроисхождение персонажа точно не установлено.




75


Portmanteau Ц большой чемодан, состо€щий из двух складывающихс€ равных частей. Portmanteau words Ц это слова, составленные из двух разных слов.




76


The Lion and the Unicorn Ц лев и единорог, символы ¬еликобритании, изображенные на ее гербе, а также персонажи попул€рной песенки, котора€ цитируетс€ в этой главе.




77


AngloSaxon attitudes Ц то есть очень замысловато.




78


I love my love with an H Ц это попул€рна€ салонна€ игра ¬икторианской эпохи. ¬се положенные фразы нужно было закончить словами, начинающимис€ с одной буквы, переход€ затем к следующей букве алфавита.




79


Salvolatile Ц нюхательна€ соль, смесь на основе нашатырного спирта, которую давали вдохнуть при обмороке.




80


Drummed them out of town Ц выражение drum smb out of town означает Ђизгнать с позоромї.




81


Conjuringtrick Ц фокус.




82


Chicken Ц трус.




83


Ahoy! Ц устаревший способ окликнуть когол., часто используетс€ в юмористическом контексте.




84


Check Ц шах (угроза королю противника).




85


»сследователи утверждают, что это описание самого Ћьюиса  эрролла.  артину дополн€ют живое воображение рыцар€, его неуклюжие ужимки и неспособность сопровождать јлису на ее пути в королевы.




86


Meatcourse Ц парадный обед состо€л из подаваемых в определенной последовательности блюд. ¬се начиналось с закусок, супа, рыбы, дичи, затем подавались жаркое и десерт.




87


IТll tell thee everything I can Ц считаетс€, что это стихотворение было наве€но поэмой ”иль€ма ¬одсворта (1770Ц1850) Ђ–ешительность и независимостьї.




88


Whiskers Ц бакенбарды; в ¬икторианскую эпоху они были в моде.




89


Batter Ц жидкое тесто из муки, €иц, молока и/или воды, обычно используетс€ дл€ блинчиков и кл€ра.




90


Hansomcabs Ц хэнсом Ц двухколесный экипаж дл€ двоих пассажиров с кучерским местом сзади, изобретенный ƒжозефом ’энсомом и запатентованный в 1834 г.




91


Menai Bridge Ц подвесной мост, соедин€ющий остров »нглеси с материковым ”эльсом. Ѕыл построен по проекту “омаса “елфорда в 1826 г.




92


Ђ√оворить, только когда к тебе обращаютс€ї, было незыблемым правилом детей ¬икторианской эпохи.




93


¬ викторианской Ѕритании существовала жестка€ иерархи€, и каждый, кто приходил в дом, точно знал, в какую дверь ему стучать или звонить. „ерный ход был дл€ прислуги, торговцев и т.д., а парадный Ц дл€ посетителей.




94


To the LookingGlass world it was Alice that saidЕ Ц это пароди€ на стихотворение ¬альтера —котта Ђ расавчик ƒандиї (1825), посв€щенное герою €кобитских войн ƒжону √рэхему  лэверхаузу, первому виконту ƒанди.




95


Ќа обедах блюда подавались в определенной последовательности: закуски (если были), суп, рыба, дичь, жаркое и десерт. јлиса пропустила первую половину обеда.




96


Ёто не просто очередное стихотворение о рыбе: любители Ћьюиса  эрролла вычислили, что разгадка Ц устрица!




97


Extinguisher Ц металлический колпачок на длинной ручке, с помощью которого гасили свечи. ¬ современном €зыке extinguisher означает огнетушитель.




98


Decanters Ц винные графины.




99


A boat beneath a sunny sky Ц это акростих: первые буквы строк складываютс€ в им€ јлисы Ц Alice Pleasance Liddell.


